C15 Documentation C15 Documentation C15 Documentation <!-- --> 

=== C15 User Manual ===

 <!-- --> 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 <!-- --> 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 <!-- --> 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 <!-- --> 

=== Illustrations ===

 

=== Documents Settings ===

 <!-- Search --> 

=== Developer Mode ===

 

=== Color Theme ===

 

=== SW Version ===

 23-36 Date 2023-09-07 C15 Documentation :( Your browser seems to block the execution of javascript.
However, this site relies on javascript and other modern web features.
Please consider the following: Ensure that your browser is up-to-date.
Try to avoid using a deprecated browser (like Internet Explorer).
Find the javascript option in your browser settings and enable it.
When javascript is enabled, this page will automatically redirect to the root page of the C15 Reference.
If the problem still persists, we recommend to try another browser.
In most modern browsers, the settings are available in the main browser menu - usually located on the top-right of the window.
Commonly, the settings can also be searched for specific keywords.
Another common feature is to load the settings page or specific settings by typing directly into the address bar.
However, this all depends on the browser you are using: Chrome/Chromium, Opera Find the browser settings in the main menu and search for javascript.
There should be an option for javascript in the Privacy and security/ Site Settings section, which should be set to "Allowed (recommended)".
(Alternatively, you can type chrome://settings/content/javascript in the address bar.) Safari Find the browser settings in the main menu under Preferences....
There should be a Security icon, opening the corresponding tab.
In the Web content section, an option for javascript should be available.
It should be set to enabled.
Firefox Type about:config in the address bar, redirecting to the settings page.
Search for javascript and find the javascript.
enabled option.
It should be set to enabled.
Edge Open the settings page from the browser menu.
You can search for javascript or find the option under Site permissions/ JavaScript.
It should be set to "Allowed (recommended)".
Developer Manual - 1.
Goals and Requirements C15 Documentation / Developer Manual / Goals and Requirements Goals and Requirements Bundled Documentation The C15 Documentation aims to bundle all available documentation (manuals, info sheets, tutorials, ...) in one single static HTML project.
By that premise, the whole documentation is organized within a single directory, servable via the official website and/or the embedded NUC.
The project structure also aims for github integration in the future.
Required resources (images, css, javascript, fonts) are contained within the project and are available for all pages.
Most resources are structured in a modular fashion.
Static (but reduced) HTML The project does not use any precompilers, it is plain HTML in combination with (modern) CSS and Javascript.
The project aims for the support of http (web) and file (local) protocols, so it can also be placed on the USB stick.
This however means, that many modern features are not available due to browser restrictions (CORS policies and alike).
The effort of producing content should be as reduced as possible (avoiding any redundancies if possible).
For example, the menu and navigation of documents (or their chapters) is realized by iframe elements, so they effectively are another shared resource.
The Table of Contents for all documents and chapters is contained within this single file: ./documents/_content.
html.
Developer information is separated (./developer folder) and hidden by default.
When using the Developer Option, those documents (and hidden comments) will become visible/available.
Specific pages can be printed.
The printing format is rather primitie at the moment, but should suffice to print on A4 pages.
Constant access to Navigation, Responsive design The user should always be able to quickly navigate between documents or chapters.
This should not be affected by circumstances like the page scroll position or screen/window dimensions.
A Menu section provides different means of navigation and access to settings.
Using a wide screen, it will be available on the left of the window.
On narrow screens, it is available as an overlay and accessable via a menu button on the top-right.
At any moment, the user should be able to quickly browse different pages.
The legacy scroll-to-top mechanism is also available.
Besides, three 

=== Color Theme ===

s are supported: dark (ignoring system/browser preference), auto (using system/browser preference), light (ignoring system/browser preference).
Images are intended to be present in three variations: -dark, -light, -print.
(The attribute has to be present in the file name, f.
e.
image-dark.
png) As -print variations are not present at the moment, the -light variation will be taken when printing a page.
(Feature is optional and can be set in shared.
js) Requirements We aim for modern browsers and do not support "historical" pre Web 2.
0 stuff.
So, CSS3 and Javascript are required.
Developer Manual - 2.
Layout and Implementation C15 Documentation / Developer Manual / Layout and Implementation Layout and Implementation Noscript Fallback As Javascript is required, a noscript fallback is implemented on every page.
If the used browser does not provide enabled Javascript, the user will be automatically redirected to a central error page when trying to open a file.
Responsive Page Layout CSS Media Queries are used to support narrow screens on mobile devices (phone, tablet).
On narrow screens, there is still a header present, providing the current location (root/which_document/which_chapter).
Also, a menu icon ( ) will be available, opening the navigation and settings section as an overlay on the whole screen.
Should the user want to print a page, a separate print layout will become effective.
For example, the navigation and settings section will not be avaibale here and a light and grayscale coloring applies (regardless of the currently active color theme).
Automatic Generation The declared goal of avoiding redundancies, especially in the HTML part, is realized in several ways.
Javascript will automatically create the menu section (Documents, Settings) for a particular page.
Also, the current document and chapter is determined and will be shown in the list of available documents and chapters (Documents).
Subchapters will become available as well.
In order for this to work, Javascript uses URLSearchParams and passes them to iframe elements.
The 

=== Color Theme ===

 setting and 

=== Developer Mode ===

 is also implemented via those params.
(They also would "survive" bookmarking a specific page) Javascript also ensures that images will switch their content following the active color theme.
This also requires the matchMedia object.
Usually, color-scheme-aware pictures require much HTML, as compared to mere images.
Javascript will also take care of that, so the author just needs to use a simple picture element and can specify image variations with a wildcard pattern: &lt;picture&gt; &lt;source srcset="image-dark.
jpg" media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)"&gt; &lt;source srcset="image-light.
jpg" media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)"&gt; &lt;img src="image-print.
jpg"&gt; &lt;/picture&gt; This is the usual HTML code for defining color-scheme-aware pictures.
&lt;picture data-src="image-*.jpg"&gt;&lt;/picture&gt; Javascript reduces the HTML drastically by exploiting a wildcard pattern.
In addition, Javascript also realizes and reduces HTML for: figure elements that can be maximized (shown in an overlay over the whole screen when clicking on the maximize icon) highlighted elements/sections (warnings, notes, developer comments, keywords) Developer Manual - 3.
Structure and Components C15 Documentation / Developer Manual / Structure and Components Structure and Components Structure The overall project structure looks something like this: C15 Documentation css developer documents man-user 00-preface 00-1-safety.
html (...) (...) index.
html (...) _content.
html favicon fonts images diagrams hardware-ui package symbols web-ui js _menu.
html _noscript.
html index.
html The main folder contains: css: four css files (for iframe and primary content) within a folder.
developer: content that is only visible in developer mode.
documents: actual user-relevant documents.
They can contain subfolders for chapters in case there are too many files.
They also have an index page (the document title page).
One single file (_content.
html) holds all navigational links to documents, chapters and subchapters.
favicon, fonts: shared resources images: images are shared resources and as a proposal, they are organized thematically - with no association to a specific document or chapter.
js: four javascript files (organized similar to css files) In the main folder, there is the main index landing page, the noscript fallback and a subpage for displaying the menu content (Documents, Settings).
Creating Documents The procedure requires the author to create a new "document" folder and corresponding html pages in the ./documents folder.
To got startet fast and easy, just clone the ./developer/template folder (Template Document).
The minimal required HTML for the title and chapter pages and an overview of usable components is provided.
The next necessary step is to provide links in the ./documents/_content.
html file, following the given hirarchy.
In order for this to work, path attributes are used.
The path of this page is root/man-developer/03-structure-and-components.
Sections in the _content.
html file will translate this path step by step.
Javascript resolves that path and determines, which document and chapter links will be shown.
The path size is arbitrary, but should not be too big.
It has to be unique between all documents, chapters and subchapters.
Once the document and it's first chapter exists, the process of adding more chapters is more or less copy-paste action.
The inner organization does not follow a specific rule.
It mainly depends on the document size and number of files.
Long single pages are possible (but not always practical) as well as large amounts of files (possibly within subfolders).
File- and folder names should not contain spaces.
Other possible resources like images may be added to the shared ./images folder or fitting subfolder.
Components [tbc] Developer Manual - 4.
Things left to do C15 Documentation / Developer Manual / Things left to do Things left to do [tbc] Developer Manual - 5.
Potential Enhancements C15 Documentation / Developer Manual / Potential Enhancements Potential Enhancements [tbc] Developer Manual C15 Documentation / Developer Manual Developer Manual This document explains the inner workings of the HTML project and shows how to produce content within it.
const test = document.
querySelector("main").appendChild(document.
createElement("section")); test.
innerHTML = "Font Symbols"; const start = 0xE000, count = 0x0320, line = 0x10; let str = "" for(let j = start; j < start + count; j += line) { str += `${j.
toString(16).toUpperCase()}`; for(let i = j; i < j + line; i++) { const code = i.
toString(16).toUpperCase(); // str += `&#x${code};`; str += `${String.
fromCharCode(i)}`; } str += "" } str += "" test.
innerHTML += str; Chapter - My Document C15 Documentation / Template Document / Chapter Chapter ...
Subchapter Components - My Document C15 Documentation / Template Document / Components Components ...
<!-- Links Quotes Figures Keywords Columns Round Highlight Decorated Headings --> Template Document C15 Documentation / Template Document Template Document Title Page Subchapter - My Document C15 Documentation / Template Document / Chapter / Subchapter Subchapter ...
<!-- --> C15 Documentation Quick Start Change Log 23-36 Service Update - Setting Improvements 23-26 Spring Update Improvements 3 23-17 Spring Update Improvements 2 23-12 Spring Update Improvements 1 23-05 Spring 2023 Update 22-27 Service Update - new Hardware Support 22-16 Studio Package Improvements 2 21-49 Studio Package Improvements 1 21-26 Studio Package Update 2021 21-07 Bugfixes and UI Improvements 20-52 Dual Mode Improvements and new Features 20-28 C15 Software Update 2020 Manuals User Manual Safety Instructions, Precautions Package Contents Device Overview Introduction Setting up the C15 Installing the Panel Unit Connections Start and Shutdown Setting up a device for the Graphical User Interface Pedal Integration Basic Concepts Base Unit Details Bender and Ribbons Headphone Connectors and Volume Base Unit Control Panel Output Volume Power Connector, LED and Button Audio Outputs Pedal Connectors USB Connector Connector Cable Panel Unit Details (left) Parameter Panels Edit Panel (right) Parameter Panels Sound Types Performance (Keybed and Hardware Sources) Macro Controls Parameters Modulation Scheme Presets Organization The Undo Tree User Interfaces Parameter Organization Selection Parameters Editing a Parameter Editing the Modulation of a Parameter Macro Controls Editing a Macro Control Macro Control Properties Assigning a Macro Control to Hardware Sources Hardware Sources Editing a Hardware Source Hardware Source Properties Mapping a Hardware Source to Macro Controls Presets Loading a Preset Storing a Preset Editing Presets and Banks Importing/Exporting Banks Locking Sound Manipulation Main Parameters of a Sound Manipulating Sounds Converting Sound Types Part Manipulation Main Parameters of a Part Working with Parameters of Split or Layer Sounds Split Sound Details Layer Sound Details Loading from/into Parts Contextual Info Overviews The Undo Mechanism The Rename Mechanism Setup Navigation Backups Base Unit Functionality Graphical UI Functionality Presets Banks The View Menu Context Menus GUI Settings The Synthesis Engine Concept Signal Flow and Components Envelopes Oscillators Shapers Comb Filter State Variable Filter Feedback Mixer Output Mixer Flanger Cabinet Gap Filter Echo Reverb Main Parameter Groups and Post Processing Dual Mode Signal Flow Using Hardware Sources Recorder MIDI MIDI Events Connecting the C15 to a USB Device MIDI Settings Practical Studio Examples Setup (C15 System Settings) Updating the C15 Specifications Parameter Reference License Documents Keyboard Shortcuts 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 Features Quick Start List of Pedal Presets Connection Setup Usage Pedal / Source Types Features explained Troubleshooting and Tips 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 General Indicators Special Error/Blink Codes Firmware Version Identification (Blink Pattern after Power Up) Firmware Update Hardware Port Speed Identification 

=== Illustrations ===

 Parameter Modulation Synth Engine (simplified) Synth Engine (detailed) Tutorials 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 About these tutorials Init Sound Oscillator Section / Creating Waveforms The State Variable Filter The Output Mixer The Comb Filter Using Feedback Paths Known Issues Developer Template Document Chapter Subchapter Components Developer Manual Goals and Requriements Layount and Implementation Structure and Components Things left to do Potential Enhancements Change Log - [20-28] C15 Software Update 2020 C15 Documentation / Change Log / C15 Software Update 2020 20-28 C15 Software Update 2020 The C15 received a major update of the operating system, the Synth Engine and the User Interface.
The update includes , and modes, more voices, and more Controls and Targets.
This update continues the constant evolution of the C15 since its launch nearly three years ago.
It expands the range and quality of sounds and improves the playability and suitability for musical performance.
The new software is a complete rewrite.
Based on the new architecture, future developments will be easier and will also benefit from new opportunities.
The Synth Engine and the User Interface now both run on Linux.
The update is free for all C15 users, who will also benefit from the interchangeable magnetic foils, as the new version comes with updated overlays reflecting the new features.
Enhanced Quality and Performance More efficient sound engine: 24 voices (before: 20), two complete effects chains Sample-precise envelope times Enhanced velocity resolution Optimized keyboard latency Improved glitch suppression for preset recalls Support for more types of pedals and footswitches Better linearisation of the Ribbons Dual Modes The 24 voices can be split into two (groups of 12 voices for and ), loading different presets.
Each Part contains a complete effect section.
The voice allocation can run in or Mode.
Mode and are assigned to different key ranges.
Mode Voices from and are stacked per key.
The Feedback Mixer now has additional channels to receive signals from the other .
This means that in mode the two voices not only can run in parallel but their signal processing can be combined in serial and feedback structures, allowing e.
g.
4-operator PM or 8-pole filters.
The mode also offers crossfades that are controlled by the velocity or the key position.
Monophonic Modes The voice allocation now supports monophonic playing with Lowest, Highest and Last Key priority, four different Legato modes and an adjustable Glide time.
(Up to 24 unison voices can be layered.) Six Macro Controls The four existing Controls (, , , ) are extended by and .
All six Macros are also available in the View, a 2-D control surface for touch screens.
More Modulation Targets Additional parameters (e.
g.
the Oscillator Phases) can be assigned to the Controls.
New Parameters Envelope A/B: Velocity amounts for the Decay 1 and Decay 2 times Envelope A/B: Elevate can raise the Breakpoint and Sustain levels for the timbre or the amplitude of an oscillator.
Envelope C: Retrigger Hardness can control the starting point of mono voices Oscillator A/B: Reset can be disabled for free-running mode Tremolo effect as an extension of the Flanger Dual mode: Volume and Tune for and Layer mode: Fade From (key), Fade Range Feedback Mixer: more inputs for cross routing in mode Output Mixer: signal split to both Dual mode effect chains Individual smoothing times for the six Controls Setting: Adjustable tuning reference: 440 +/-40 Hz Extended Parameter Ranges and Resolutions Unison with up to 24 voices (before: 12) Bipolar Level Velocity amounts (for velocity crossfades) Internal high-resolution parameter format Change Log - [20-52] Dual Mode Improvements and new Features C15 Documentation / Change Log / Dual Mode Improvements and new Features 20-52 Dual Mode Improvements and new Features The big update in the Summer of 2020 was followed by a number of bugfix updates.
Now in version 20-52 we bring some new features and functional improvements especially for the and modes.
Therefore please check this list of changes, and also see the full description in the User Manual.
Split Sounds: Key Ranges Can Overlap In earlier versions, the C15 only provided one Split Point parameter in a Sound, determining the inner edges of both fully separated , so no overlap was possible.
The described behavior is still available by default and referred to as linked Split Points.
Now, unlinked Split Points are avialable as well, providing separate Split Points for each (but still sharing one unique Control assignment).
When unlinked, an overlapping range of shared keys can be defined, in which both will sound.
A negative overlap (a key range with no Part association) will be prevented.
Editors Split Point Editor (Split Sounds) In the Tab, the righmost icon redirects to the Split Point Editor, providing the two parameters and an interactive visual representation.
Split Points can be set by clicking or dragging on the corresponding values or by dragging the indicators on the shown keybed.
The linking behavior can be set as well.
Key Fade Editor (Layer Sounds) In the Tab, the righmost icon redirects to the Key Fade Editor, providing all related aspects and an interactive visual representation.
For each , Fade From and Fade Range can be adjusted by clicking or dragging on the corresponding values or by dragging the indicators shown on the keybed.
Indicators Cross-Feedback: FB arrows are shown in the Screen/Tab of Sounds, when the A/B I/II and From I/II parameters of the Feedback Mixer create a connection between a voice of and a voice of .
Cross-Send: FX arrows are shown in the Screen/Tab of and Sounds, when the To FX I/II parameters create a signal flow to the effects of the other .
Macro Control Targets: In the Screen of the Hardware UI up to four literal symbols are shown to indicate target parameters that cannot be indicated by Selection Panel LEDs.
(M - Master Volume/Tune, u - Unison Detune, m - Mono Glide, P - Part Volume/Tune or Split Point) Key Fades: When a of a Sound is affected by a Key Fade, this will be indicated in the Screen/Tab by a small fade graph next to the Part Volume.
Settings Device Settings / Sync Parts across UIs: For and Sounds, different can be shown on the C15's Display and on one or multiple instances of the UI.
This can be useful but in many cases it was confusing.
Therefore the normal behaviour is now that the Part selection is applied once to all UIs, corresponding to Sync Parts across UIs being on.
When the option is set off the Parts can be selected separately.
Hardware UI / Screensaver Timeout: An optional timeout setting has been added in order to prevent possible pixel deterioration in the two displays, which can occur when the C15 is running for longer periods of time without any interaction.
Part Mute Will Not Mute Additional Signal Paths Unlike in earlier versions, the muting of a of a Sound, will only affect the final Part Volume stage.
So any signal flow across Parts will be maintained regardless.
Extended Internal Key Range In earlier versions, the C15 only operated on its physical key range of 61 keys (C1 ...
C6).
In this version, a virtual key range of 128 keys (C-2 ...
G8) was added.
The physical key range of 61 keys is now projected onto the virtual key range, depending on the Note Shift, which is now a real key shift and not a tuning anymore.
Shortcuts for Part Selection The keys 1 and 2 of the computer keyboard can be used to select Part or .
Bug Fixes and Performance Improvements We constantly strive to improve the quality and efficiency of the C15's software.
Change Log - [21-07] Bugfixes and UI Improvements C15 Documentation / Change Log / Bugfixes and UI Improvements 21-07 Bugfixes and UI Improvements This software update for the C15 comes with some bug fixes and improvements for the user interfaces of version 20-52 and version 21-02.
IMPORTANT If you update from version 21-02 you might get the error message Updating C15 FAILED during the installation.
In this case the installer needs to be run a second time.
Please restart the C15 without removing the USB stick.
Now the update should be successful.
Change Log - [21-26] Studio Package Update 2021 C15 Documentation / Change Log / Studio Package Update 2021 21-26 Studio Package Update 2021 The C15 gets a major update that includes USB MIDI connectivity and an internal digital audio recorder.
For connecting the C15 directly to a computer we are offering a new small hardware device called the MIDI Bridge.
Again this update continues the constant evolution of the C15 since its launch.
Last summer we extended the synth engine by , and modes, new parameters and added more Controls.
The current implementation of a interface is now widening up the spectrum of applications for the C15, especially in the studio environment.
The second feature included in this software release is an internal digital recorder.
It automatically stores the audio output signal of the last hours in the C15.
USB MIDI Features at a glance Transmits and receives notes, positions of the Sources, Program Changes Up to 90 parameters can be modulated via the Controls 14-bit resolution for Note Velocities and for Controls available Separate MIDI Channels for zones and of the Synth Engine available Local On/Off Connecting the C15 to a USB Device The USB host interface of the C15 can be directly connected to USB MIDI devices.
The C15 has a Type A connector for USB, and its embedded computer system works as a USB host for USB devices connected to this port.
This means that you only need a standard USB cable to set up a MIDI communication with an instrument, a hardware sequencer, or a MIDI interface, or any device with a USB Type B connector.
Connecting the C15 using 5-pole DIN Connectors To use the classical MIDI cables and 5-pin DIN Ins and Outs a USB MIDI interface can be connected as an USB device directly to the USB port of the C15.
High Resolution Mode As classical MIDI operates on 7 bit resolution (128 steps), there is a loss in accuracy.
The C15 operates on much higher precision.
Nevertheless, precision can be maintained by enabling the High Resolution options.
For more information, please refer to the User Manual, chapter MIDI.
MIDI Bridge - Connecting the C15 to a Computer For the connection to a computer we provide the MIDI Bridge.
It allows high speed transport of MIDI messages between two USB hosts.
A computer running a DAW or similar is the center of many setups.
It functions as a USB host and can only be connected to USB devices.
Since the C15 is also a USB host we provide the MIDI Bridge that functions as a double-sided USB device with two Type B connectors.
One of the ports is connected to the C15 and the second to your computer.
For more information, please refer to the 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

.
Internal Audio Recorder The internal recorder enables you to capture the C15's output signal with the best possible audio quality at any time, without connecting an audio interface.
From the browser-based User Interface you can play back the recorded audio and you can also restore the Synth Engine's state at the time of the play cursor.
Selected segments of the audio can be downloaded in a lossless digital format and be used directly on your computer in your production environment.
The stereo signal behind the Soft Clipper and before the D/A converter is written to the RAM, using the lossless compression of the FLAC format (24 bits, 48 kHz).
A maximum of 500 MB can be stored in the RAM.
Because of the FLAC compression this is enough for hours of permanent playing and for days of recording when there are pauses in the playing.
If the recorded amount of data exceeds the limit of 500 MB, the oldest data will be overwritten.
So it works like a ring buffer that always contains the latest recording.
Features at a glance Loss-free digital recording of the stereo output signal FLAC-compressed storage of the last hours (at least 80 min) of playing Auto-start when the C15 is booted (optional) Visualization in the browser and play-back controls Download of the selected segment as FLAC or WAV file The sound parameters at any point of the timeline can be restored Complete information about the presets used in the session For more information, please refer to the User Manual, chapter Recorder.
Change Log - [21-49] Studio Package Improvements 1 C15 Documentation / Change Log / Studio Package Improvements 1 21-49 Studio Package Improvements 1 This update addresses the newly introduced MIDI features and provides bug fixes, refinements and further enhancements.
MIDI Settings The layout and some of the labels of the MIDI Settings have been revised.
In the new Channels section the MIDI Channels for both Send and Receive can be set.
The Mappings section has been renamed to Assignments.
The Set to Defaults entries have been moved to the Assignments section.
The new Routings section cointains a matrix editor that determines for Notes, Program Changes and each of the 8 Sources separately, if MIDI messages are sent or received via the Primary MIDI channel or the Split channel.
In the matrix you can also enable and disable the Local connections between the elements of the C15's play interface and the C15's sound engine.
There is a global Local Enable in the second line of the MIDI Settings.
When it is set to Off the Local connections of all elements are interrupted.
The Panic entry has been moved to the first line.
The former Receive, Send and Local sections have been removed in favor of the new approach.
Correct display of CC numbers for 7-bit and 14-bit resolution in the Assignments and in the labels.
Local Off for Ribbons If a is set to Local Off the Display shows the MIDI CC that is assigned.
The Ribbon LEDs show the position that is sent via MIDI.
MIDI Program Change Bank Selecting a Preset in the PC Bank will send a Program Change message also when the bank is not selected (Direct Load = Off).
All Notes Off, Internal Voice Reset More consistent behaviour when resetting the internal voices and sending a All Notes Off message via MIDI.
This is used to avoid stuck notes when the MIDI routings or Local connections are changed.
Panic Function Pressing all four buttons of the Unit (-, +, Funct, Mode) at the same time will reset all internal voices and send All Notes Off via MIDI.
WIFI Passphrase The passphrase can now be edited and reset to the default (88888888).
A Randomize (Dice) function is still available, too.
Fixes and Improvements in some Preset Store functions in the Backup Restore function in the New Bank function in the Bank Collapse function in the Bank Import function in the Preset screen in the Preset/Bank file format to fix a problem with Split Sound parameters Please note The Bank and Backup files stored with this software version cannot be loaded with earlier versions.
Known Issues When Local is disabled, not every necessary All Notes Off message is sent to stop stuck notes.
The button combination for Panic can lead to unintended changes on the base unit settings.
Change Log - [22-16] Studio Package Improvements 2 C15 Documentation / Change Log / Studio Package Improvements 2 22-16 Studio Package Improvements 2 This update further refines newly introduced MIDI features and provides additional bug fixes and enhancements.
Hardware Sources The Positions of Hardware Sources are now separated from Presets.
This allows for more reliable Preset recall and store behavior, even when returning Sources are not in their return positions.
However, the Return Behavior of Pedals and Ribbons remains a part of a Preset and may differ when recalling another Preset.
MIDI Assignments When a Hardware Source has a MIDI assignment, it will be indicated on the parameter (for example, the CC number).
Local On/Off Enhancements Decoupling a Hardware Source from the synth by setting Local Enable to Off, changes their representation in the UI.
The Hardware Source is now shown differentiated into Send and Receive.
Send shows the physical status of the respective Hardware Source, for example the current position of a Ribbon and relates to all communication with external devices.
This value is sent via MIDI.
Receive assigns the value that is passed internally to the synth.
This is either a value received via MIDI or, in the case of the bidirectional Ribbons, a value received via an adjusted Macro Control.
This allows the audio engine of the C15 to be triggered by an external device and at the same time the Hardware Sources can be used to control other external devices without conflict.
Changing a Hardware Source Return Behavior When [ReturnToZero/ReturnToCenter] is chosen, the position of the Hardware Source will drop to the return position.
We recommend to leave returning Sources in their return positions when changing their Return Behavior.
Otherwise, the modulation to associated Macro Controls may be compromised due to offsets and clipping Macro Controls.
If a Pedal's behavior changes [ReturnToCenter &#x2192; NonReturn/ReturnToZero], the position will be clipped (negative values will be set to zero).
Recalling a Preset with differing Return Behavior In case the return behavior of a particular Hardware Source changes when a preset is recalled, our general aim is to leave the position intact.
However, there is an exception: If a Ribbon changes [NonReturn &#x2192; ReturnToCenter], the position will drop to the return position.
Boot Sound As Hardware Source positions are not part of a Preset anymore, loading the first Sound after booting the C15 depends on how the Hardware Sources are placed physically.
Returning Hardware Sources may not be in their return positions, which will affect the Preset.
Non-returning untouched Pedals and Ribbons are dominated by associated Macro Controls and will not affect the Preset.
User Manual The User Manual has been reworked from scratch and now provides more content and better navigation.
Fixes and Improvements MIDI If the Local Enable setting of a Hardware Source changes, the last position will be shared between the Send and Receive representations (Local On &#x2192; Off: Receive &#x2192; Send, Local Off &#x2192; On: Send &#x2192; Receive).
So, even for returning Sources in arbitrary positions, the last position will correctly be reflected.
A returning Hardware Source will drop to its return position (internally, affecting the Receive representation and the Synth), when Local is disabled.
AllNotesOff messages are now sent more carefully, only if internal keys are pressed.
When recalling Split Sounds with differing Mono/Unison behavior, the message will correspond to the Part in which a reset occured.
Recorder The Auto Start option will default to Off, until it is explicitly changed.
General Fixes reworked animated screens in the Panel Unit Display introduced a Shutdown Screen (urging the User to not cut the power supply until the C15 is properly shut down) fixed Bank Import from USB Stick fixed Bank sorting Known Issues The current handling of Hardware Sources works reliably when using physical Sources or MIDI messages.
Using Hardware Sources from the Hardware UI or Web UI during Behavior changes, Preset recalls or Local changes may lead to unwanted behavior.
Recalling a [ReturnToCenter] Pedal with negative position can cause a Modulation offset.
Change Log - [22-27] Service Update - new Hardware Support C15 Documentation / Change Log / Service Update - new Hardware Support 22-27 Service Update - new Hardware Support Newer C15 devices (starting with serial no.
223) contain new hardware components that require software support and are not compatible with older software versions (before 22-27).
This update provides software support for new hardware components and ensures that C15 devices with new hardware components cannot be updated to earlier versions.
For C15 devices with new hardware components, this update is essential.
For older C15 devices, this update is optional.
We strongly recommend to not update newer C15 devices with older software versions, as the device will not be usable afterwards.
Change Log - [23-05] Spring 2023 Update C15 Documentation / Change Log / Spring 2023 Update 23-05 Spring 2023 Update The C15 gets a major update that provides lots of enhancements and new features.
Parameter Enhancements Modulateable Parameters The number of modulateable Parameters has been increased - most Parameters are now modulateable: Amounts (for Oscillator Phase Modulation, Filter Pitches and Cutoff) A/B/C - Attack Curve (effective when a Key is pressed) (3x) and (5x) Key Trackings Mixes (for Phase Modulation) and Fold, Asym (including Shaper A/B, Feedback/Output Mixer, Cabinet) Pan (Flanger, Cabinet, Gap Filter, Echo, Reverb) - all Parameters Offsets (blending between two scalings via modulation) Split Point - when unlinked, the parameter can now be modulated individually per Part The modulation mechanism has also been refined, modulated parameters now behave more consistent.
Rounding issues of displayed modulation ranges (for example unstable upper/lower limits) have been removed and discrepancies between displayed and audible parameter positions (especially the Split Point parameter) should no longer occur.
Parameter Ranges Several Parameter ranges have been extended, providing more flexibility: A/B/C - Attack/Release Velocity (now bipolar, similar to Decay 1/2 Velocity, times can be reduced or increased) (3x) and (3x) Key Trackings - new maximum at 200% A/B/C - Time Key Tracking (now bipolar, times can be reduced or increased) FB - Gate - EnvC (now bipolar, allowing for permanent feedback) Key Pan (now bipolar) Detune - new maximum at 24 st Parameter Scaling and Rounding Scaling and Rounding behavior has been reworked: Offsets - modified Parameter scaling (high precision for typcial +/- 100.
0 ct range, spanning approximately half of the slider - lower precision for atypical +/- 1200.
0 ct range) All Parameters - consistent display of values (Control Positions and Modulation Amounts) according to Parameter resolution (every Fine value has a distinct representation) Envelope C Decay 1/2 Velocity - more flexible velocity influence on times (similar to A/B) New: Loop With the new Loop Parameter, C can run in Loop mode (Loop > 0.
0%), allowing for polyphonic repeating sequences: The loop consists of the Decay 1 and 2 segments (Decay 2 has a linear curve in Loop mode) and can apply only for the Sustain phase (Loop &lt;= 100.
0%, stopping when a key is released) or for the Sustain and Release phase (Loop &gt; 100.
0%).
At Loop = 200.
0%, the loop will continue endlessly.
The loop is bound to key events.
When pressing a key, Envelope C will start normally if the Loop parameter is at zero, otherwise it will start in Loop mode.
Similarly, when releasing a key, Envelope C will stop normally if the Loop parameter is below or equal to 100.
0%, otherwise it will stop in Loop mode.
The Decay 1/2 times control the rate of the loop.
The Breakpoint/Sustain levels control the amplitude of the loop.
For each repetition, the loop amplitude will approach zero, according to the Loop parameter (smaller values: faster decay).
New: Single Sounds with Dual Effects Sounds now provide two Effect chains, allowing for more complex routings similar to Sounds.
The mix of the two chains can be controlled by a new parameter: FX Mix - crossfading between Effects and - similar to Volumes in Sounds) The Effects - From I-II and To FX I-II parameters are also available for defining the Effects and Feedback routing for both Effect chains.
The routings are indicated in the Screen or Tab.
New: Dual Effects/Part Mixing Two new parameters have been added for more versatile mixing of Parts (or Effects in Sounds): Serial FX Usually both Effect chains run in parallel.
With this new parameter, the output of one chain can be fed into the input of the other chain, allowing for flexibility in the order of effects and their complexity.
Part/FX Pan Both Effect chains can be panned against each other, more flexibly distributing their output signals in the resulting stereo mix.
New: two new virtual Ribbons 3, 4 have been added to the Sources allowing for more flexible modulation and hopefully better integrating Controls and .
The two sets of (1, 2 and 3, 4) are quickly accessible on the Unit (see below).
User Interface Enhancements Preset Screen The behavior of 1 and 4 has been reworked.
Bank and Direct Ld now remains consistent with legacy behavior as the primary command (short button press), whereas the new features (I / II and To Part) appear as the secondary command (long button press) if available.
Sound Conversion With now two Effect chains in a Sound, a conversion into a or Sound has new rules.
In order not to break established behavior, such a conversion is possible in two variants: with FX I only both FX This corresponds with legacy behavior and is useful for a typical Sound using only FX I.
After the conversion, FX I is duplicated into both Sound Effect chains.
For a Sound using both Effect chains, a conversion copying both chains is more useful.
Here, the FX Mix parameter is also considered and translated into Volume parameters.
Also, cross Feedback and FX routings are maintained.
A conversion of a Sound into a Sound will copy both Effect chains and reflect Volume parameters and cross Feedback and FX routings.
Sound Initialization When holding down the Button in the or Screen, the Screen will be visible.
Here, 1,2,3 can be used to initialize with a desired Type.
In or Sounds, 4 can be used to initialize only the Part/FX currently in focus.
Copy FX When pressing the Button in the Screen, two new options provide a quick way to copy the Effect chain from one Part into the other.
Preset Search The Preset Search has been reworked from scratch and is now quickly accessible via the top-left Icon.
The search results are now shown in a separate list and can be sorted and filtered to match specific or Tags.
Presets can be loaded directly from the list.
In addition, Presets can be dragged and dropped into new or existing Banks.
Fine Mode In the Tab, a new icon shows if the Mode is active (when pressing the Shift key).
The Fine Mode can also be enabled permanently by clicking the icon (and will stay enabled as long as the selected Parameter has a Fine Resolution).
Scale Parameter Screen A new Screen has been added to better show Scale parameters.
It can be accessed from the Master Parameter Screen.
Hardware Source and Macro Control Screens Routing Sources to Controls has been more complex than it needed to be, possibly causing some confusion when trying to modify the Matrix.
Also, with the two new Ribbons, there are two more amounts to consider.
Therefore, setting Amounts has been simplified, deprecating the Screen and bundling all functionality exclusively within the Screen.
By using 2 and 4, Amounts can be set for the Control in focus.
In the Screen, all related parameter aspects can be changed.
Assignments are shown on the left (and can be changed via Setup MIDI settings).
For , their Behavior can be modified via 4 (previously only available via the Button on the Unit).
Changed Functionality When in Mode, the Button will now switch between the two sets of (1/2 or 3/4) - the selected set is then operable on the two touch strips.
Ribbon Behavior can now be changed in the corresponding Screen on the Unit.
Additional Fixes Importing older Banks converted some parameters wrongfully Affected Parameters were: Attack Velocity and Time Key Tracking, Feedback - Env C and Key Pan.
When closing the Tab in the browser, the playback will stop automatically.
Selection Selecting a (or Group in Sounds) is now undoable.
Attack Curvature The Parameters are now applied for each voice.
When the Parameter changes within the Attack segment of a played node, the change will not apply for the active voice.
Wrong Decay 1/2 times In earlier versions, Decay 1/2 times were wrongfully influenced by Decay 1/2 Velocity parameters.
Voice Mixing in Sounds is now consistent All 24 voices are now mixed and unambiguously routed to a specific Group.
Known limitations and issues Preset Search - drag and drop on touch devices When dragging one or multiple presets from the search results list and dropping the selection (into an existing bank or onto the background to create a new bank), the selection may not be released correctly and remains stuck on the screen as a visual bug, freezing the UI.
After refreshing the page, the UI will be usable again.
Audible artifacts of modulated Parameters With the introduction of more modulateable Parameters, some audible artifacts may appear when some parameters are transitioning (the issue is not really new, but modulation increases the chance of noticing the artifacts).
The rendering of these movements is often not computed in audio rate (as a means of not wasting CPU power), leading to the described artifacts.
Affected Parameters are: A/B: Phase Modulation - Envelope and Shaper Amounts A/B: Drive Envelope Amount and FB - Gate - EnvC.
, : PM/FM A-B : Phase, Envelope : Fold, Asymetry : Pre Delay Audible artifacts of Envelope C modulation Similar to the phenomenon described above, Envelope C modulation can also lead to artifacts (especially when using very small Decay 1/2 times).
The State Variable Filter Cutoff also seems to produce artifacts when strongly modulated by Envelope C.
Feedback/FX flow indicators The combination of shown volumes and flow arrows is a little misleading, as a volume is applied at the end of the flow chain, but appears to be at the start.
Change Log - [23-12] Spring Update Improvements 1 C15 Documentation / Change Log / Spring Update Improvements 1 23-12 Spring Update Improvements 1 This update addresses recently introduced features and provides bug fixes, refinements and further enhancements.
User Interface Enhancements New: Preset Info - Properties Preset metadata now includes a Properties field which provides automatically generated hashtags, depending on specific parameters of the preset.
Similar to custom hashtags (usable in the Comment section), searching for presets by using hashtags can be much more convenient.
Depending on the preset's Type, a #Single/#Split/#Layer hashtag is provided.
A #Poly/#Mono hashtag is provided, depending on the Mono Enable parameter.
A #Unison/#1-voice hashtag is provided, depending on the Unison Voices parameter.
A #Scale/#12-TET (12-Tone-Equal-Temperament) hashtag is provided, depending on whether Offset parameters are used in the Scale group.
In order to be able to search for specific property hashtags, the Properties checkbox in the search options has to be enabled.
New: Preset Scale Indicator According to the #Scale hashtag, an &#xE042; indicator is shown next to the preset (similar to &#xE041; - #Unison and &#xE040; - #Mono).
Setup Menu - Fine Mode support Numeric settings (Edit Smoothing Time, Tune Reference, Transition Time, Encoder Acceleration, Ribbon Relative Factor) can now also be fine-tuned by using the Button.
Setup Menu - Single Setting default The Button is now usable for most settings in the Menu.
In the UI, settings represented as sliders can be set to default by double-clicking.
Bugfixes and Improvements Signal Flow Indication - Feedback When any parameter of Envelope C is currently selected, the FB Mix LED of a particular Shaper will only blink if the corresponding "FB - Gate - Env C" parameter is greater than zero (as otherwise, there is no influence of the Envelope on the Shaper mix).
Preset Store - Overwrite When the currently selected Bank is empty, overwriting a Preset will now store the Preset within the Bank, instead of creating a new Bank.
Ribbon Touch Behavior When a is selected in the Screen, 4 will now show Touch instead of Mode.
Single Sounds - Copy FX In the Tab, options for copying the FX chain into the other are now available as well.
Parameter Tab - defaultable Modulation Aspects When a Modulation Aspect (Amount, Upper/Lower Limit) of a modulateable parameter is in focus, a double click will now set the modulation amount to its default value (instead of defaulting the control position).
FX Parameter Groups Similar to the UI, the group labels now have an indicator corresponding to the selected Part.
Numerical Settings - Precision and Ranges The Reference, the Time and the Time now show their values with consistent precision between both UIs.
Both times can now be set to 0.
0 ms.
Bidirectional Ribbons - MIDI issues When a non-returning is bidirectionally associated to a Control, MIDI will now only be sent if the Ribbon was changed directly (by using the Touchstrip or changing the corresponding slider).
If the Macro was changed directly or by a , the slider of the Ribbon will change as well, but no MIDI will be sent.
With Local enabled and using MIDI Loopback (having the C15 connected to a DAW for example, receiving and sending MIDI at the same time), using Ribbons will now cause less traffic and no more glitchy behavior (see below).
MIDI Loopback is only recommended when having Local disabled for Notes and Sources.
When having Local enabled, MIDI Loopback will lead to a Note being played twice (internally and in addition from MIDI In).
Further Improvements after booting, LEDs of a Touchstrip will correspond to the associated Control, if the linking is bidirectional in the Screen/Tab, the indication of feedback signal flow by displaying arrows is now more consistent the Search window in the UI will refresh after restoring a backup in a Sound, unused (having no influence on the sound) will be indicated as a cross in the sound symbol, similar to muted Parts or unused FX in Sounds when updating the C15 via the Stick, the update will now be installed once (instead of starting the update again after successful installation).
when a returning Source was changed on the Unit, the control will automatically and now more consistently reset to zero when loosing focus (for example storing a Preset or invoking the Setup Menu will reset the source) in the Tab, the Indicator is now better integrated with the Key Change Log - [23-17] Spring Update Improvements 2 C15 Documentation / Change Log / Spring Update Improvements 2 23-17 Spring Update Improvements 2 This update further refines newly introduced features and provides additional bug fixes and enhancements.
Enhancements New: MIDI - Active Sensing Some USB-to-MIDI adapters can flexibly change their MIDI ports and switch from Send to Receive automatically, when no MIDI has been sent for a while.
Currently, ESI (MIDIMATE) and Swissonic (MidiConnect2) products are known to do this.
The switching results in glitchy behavior, but can be avoided by repeatedly sending Active Sensing messages (which should otherwise have no effect).
Therefore, a new option has been added to the Assignments section.
If enabled, active sensing messages will be permanently emitted, preventing the connected MIDI device from switching its ports.
As this causes more traffic (which may not be wanted), the option can be disabled.
Bugfixes and Improvements Preset Search - Hashtags The search algorithim has been improved and now distinguishes ordinary search terms from hashtags (hashtags can now only be found when a search term starts with the # symbol).
With this distinction, the Properties search option seemed redundant and has been removed.
Presets - cut and paste After pasting a cut preset, the original preset will now be removed, as it should be.
Unison - parameter selection In Sounds with &#xE082; in focus, parameters of the Group now show correct values when traversing the parameter stack with 4.
MIDI - Local On/Off after booting After booting the C15 and then immediately changing the Local Enable option (or specific Local options in the Routings section), Sources wrongfully changed their values.
This has been fixed and the values now remain in sync.
Documentation - mobile layout On mobile devices, the appearance of the C15 Documentation was compromised when viewing in portrait mode.
The additional menu bar of the mobile browser overshadowed the internal navigation and menu, effectively disabling navigation alltogether.
This has been fixed and the navigation and menu should now be permanently visible in portrait mode (except for iPhones, in which case we recommend to fall back to viewing in landscape mode).
Base Unit - booting in Play Mode When booting the C15, the Unit will now always start in Mode, discarding the last active mode before shutdown.
This ensures, that Shift is always visible after booting and can be modified directly.
Change Log - [23-26] Spring Update Improvements 3 C15 Documentation / Change Log / Spring Update Improvements 3 23-26 Spring Update Improvements 3 This update provides a few additional bug fixes.
Bugfixes and Improvements Backups - new file format The file format of backup files has been reworked in order to prevent download issues (as some browsers will automatically unpack downloaded archives).
So, instead of .xml.
tar.
gz, downloaded backups will now be provided in a custom .nlbackup format.
(The former tarball format is still supported when restoring backups, so existing backup files are still restorable without a file conversion.) Layer Sound - Fade Indicators In the Tab of a Sound, the Fade indicators incorrectly reacted on mouse clicks, which has been removed.
Flanger - Envelope In Sounds, the envelope of the Flanger had inconsistent behavior: only when no keys are priorly pressed, the next pressed key should always start the envelope.
The mechanism now reworks reliably for both FX groups.
In Sounds, pressed keys are counted for each individually.
Midi Settings - change detection In order to avoid hanging notes, changing Midi settings (like Send or Receive channels) require that the system resets all notes internally and also propagates the reset externally when Midi send is used.
However, this only worked internally and hanging Midi notes were still possible.
With this fix, changing Midi settings will lead to an internal and external reset as soon as any (internal or external) note is active.
Documentation - broken links Sub chapters within chapter Signal Flow and Components of the User Manual had broken navigation links, which has been fixed.
Change Log - [23-36] Service Update - Setting Improvements C15 Documentation / Change Log / Service Update - Setting Improvements 23-36 Service Update - Setting Improvements This Update provides a few reworked System Settings in order to streamline device configuration and test procedures of the C15.
Besides speeding up the initial Factory configuration, this may also turn out to be helpful when checking the synth on-stage.
Enhancements Device Settings New: Load Factory Defaults Formerly only a Developer Option, this action is now also available as a proper Setting.
When invoked, this action has to be confirmed, before all Settings will be reset to their Factory Default values.
New: Test Tone Formerly only an internal feature, the Test Tone has been reworked and is now introduced as a new Setting.
A pure sine tone with a frequency corresponding to the Tune Reference Setting and an amplitude of -6 dBFS can be added to the stereo signal of the synth.
There are four modes for this setting: Off Only the stereo signal of the synth is audible.
Left The Test Tone will be added only to the left channel of the stereo signal.
Right The Test Tone will be added only to the right channel of the stereo signal.
Both The Test Tone will be added to both channels of the stereo signal.
System Info Date/Time In the , the Setting can now be adjusted as well.
Bugfixes and Improvements MIDI Settings Send Active Sensing The Factory Default value for this Setting has been changed to Off, as this only applies for very specific MIDI devices.
Change Log <!-- --> <!-- C15 Documentation / Change Log --> <!-- Change Log --> 

=== Illustrations ===

 C15 Documentation / 

=== Illustrations ===

 

=== Illustrations ===

 

=== Illustrations ===

 - Parameter Modulation C15 Documentation / 

=== Illustrations ===

 / Parameter Modulation Parameter Modulation Parameter Modulation Scheme Macro Amount Param <!-- --> <!-- Editor --> Presets no Mod.
full Mod.
inverted Mod.
Macro Amount A.
Upper A.
Lower Param Settings &#xe0a4; Graph &#xe0a4; Clipping &#xe0a4; Animate 

=== Illustrations ===

 - Synth Engine (detailed) C15 Documentation / 

=== Illustrations ===

 / Synth Engine (detailed) C15 Synth Engine (detailed) nohighlighting FMSynthesis SubtractiveSynth Exciter +Resonator Feedback 

=== Illustrations ===

 - Synth Engine (simplified) C15 Documentation / 

=== Illustrations ===

 / Synth Engine (simplified) C15 Synth Engine (simplified) nohighlighting FMSynthesis SubtractiveSynth Exciter +Resonator Feedback Known Issues C15 Documentation / Known Issues Known Issues This document is currently in development and will be added in the future.


=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 - 01.
General C15 Documentation / 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 / General General Usage and Operation Usage The MIDI Bridge is intended to connect two MIDI systems together when both systems are USB Hosts.
A typical example is a Digital Audio Workstation (DAW) running on a PC and a NonlinearLabs C15 Synthesizer.
As the C15 only offers a USB host-type socket (USB Type A) it cannot be connected to the PC directly, therefore a data bridge is needed which has USB device-type sockets on both ends (USB Type B) so that the device can be connected to both hosts.
The applications on both hosts then can communicate with each other in any direction through a USB MIDI Device which appears as NLL-MIDI-Bridge.
The bridge does not change orinterpret the data in any way and is fully transparent.
Operation he device waits for a MIDI data packet to be received on one port and when this happens, the packet is send out on the other port.
This happens for both directions independently and simultaneously.
The transfer process can be monitored with the two LED indicator lights on the top, one for each port, showing incoming data and its delivery status.
The bottom plate of the MIDI Bridge is internally equipped with magnets so that you can attach the device to magnetically responsive surfaces, notably the steel chassis of a NonlinearLabs C15 Synthesizer.
Those magnets have considerable strengths so keep the Bridge away (&gt; 0.
5m) from mechanical watches, cathode ray displays/monitors, credit cards etc with magnet strips, audio or video magnetic tapes and recorders/players, and especially from body-implanted medical devices like pacemakers.
Packet Latency The typical transfer time for the usual short MIDI packet is about 100s (s is micro-seconds;one-millionth of a second) of in either direction, assuming very little other traffic loads on the two USB busses.
When a packet could be sent within less than 300s, the transfer is considered REALTIME.
When a packet could be sent within 300s and 2ms, the transfer is considered LATE.
When a packet could be sent only after more than 2ms, the transfer is considered STALE.
All these considerations are for information, they do not represent error conditions.
Dropped Packet Errors When a packet cannot be sent out in due time, the transfer is considered DROPPED and will be aborted.
This is an error condition and may happen either when the outgoing port is not connected/ready or the host computer is currently not reading data within due time, stalling the transfer.
Windows will always accept MIDI data over USB and will never stall whereas on Linux and MacOs a running application that actually reads MIDI data is required to avoid the stalling condition When the outgoing port is not ready (not connected or not detected by the USB-host) the packet is dropped immediately.
When the port is ready and a first stalling condition occurs, a timeout of 100ms is used and the packet is dropped.
For subsequent stalling packets, the timeout is reduced to 5ms.
It then takes one successful packet delivery to reset the timeout to 100ms again.
Technical detail Until a transfer has finished (or was aborted), receiving of further packets is blocked temporarily.
There is no internal buffering, rather the transfers are in real-time, one at a time.


=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 - 02.
Indicators C15 Documentation / 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 / Indicators Indicators Each port side has a RGB (true color) LED indicator which shows both the port status and the packet status while a packet is running through.
Each port LED is referring to the incoming data on that port.
The LED color basically indicates the port status, which is the largest latency range measured in recent packet delivery (ranging some seconds back).
The LED is temporarily flashing brighter when an actual packet is running through the device and the color indicates the current latency.
Continuous Port Status Display (dim colors) The dim color of the LED represents the current status of the port: Pulsing blue (slowly blinking, 3s period) port is not connected.
Pulsing cyan (slowly blinking, 3s period) port is connected and receives USB power, but no USB communication is present.
Green port is connected and USB communication is ready to go.
Yellow port is connected and USB communication is ready to go, but there were LATE packets within the last two seconds.
Red port is connected and USB communication is ready to go, but there were STALE packets within the last four seconds Magenta port is connected and USB communication is ready to go, but there were DROPPED packets (with data loss) within the last six seconds.
Flashing Packet Status Display (bright colors) On top of the steady-state port status display above, the MIDI Bridge independently indicates the status of the current packet while it runs through the device.
This again is color-coded but can be distinguished from the port status in that the LEDs go full brightness.
Green packet is running for less than 300s (REALTIME).
Yellow packet is running for less than 2ms (LATE).
Red packet is running for more than 2ms (STALE).
Magenta packet had to be dropped (data loss).
Because the actual transfer times are normally very short (&lt; 100s) they are lengthened for display.
Still the short true transfer time is directly indicated with even brighter colors, and notably the normal green color gets brighter and more cyanish when very dense traffic is present.
In normal MIDI operation the traffic is very sparse, though.
As long as you see any LED indicator activity (steady-state on or blinking) the device is powered up and consumes electrical current.
Therefore, to save power, you may want to unplug the device from computers while those are in standby, hybernate or power-down modes but still apply supply voltage to their USB sockets.


=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 - 03.
Special Error/Blink Codes C15 Documentation / 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 / Special Error/Blink Codes Special Error/Blink Codes In normal operation, including a firmware update via MIDI SysEx message, none of the below errors will ever occur (except for Programming Finished)...
but things might go wrong on very very seldom occasions.
These are unrecoverable but mostly non-persistent errors in general, the device is temporarily not operational after an incident.
The device must be fully unplugged to reset and return to normal operation.
The LED indicator patterns are meant for post-mortem diagnosis, so please write down the colors and blink states should you ever run into such an error.
The blink rate is very fast.
First LED Second LED Meaning GREEN blinking <!-- --> GREEN blinking <!-- --> Programming Finished Successfully (NO ERROR) WHITE WHITE (blinking or not) <!-- --> Severe Code Error (Lock-Up) *) RED RED blinking <!-- --> USB Packet incorrect size RED YELLOW blinking <!-- --> Unexpected USB Packet YELLOW RED blinking <!-- --> SysEx Data Error YELLOW YELLOW Waiting for SysEx End Marker Magenta RED blinking <!-- --> Programming: Data is too large Magenta GREEN blinking <!-- --> Programming: Data Length is zero Magenta BLUE blinking <!-- --> Programming: Erase failed **) Magenta MAGENTA blinking <!-- --> Programming: WritePrepare failed **) Magenta WHITE blinking <!-- --> Programming: Write failed **) *) Software Bugs as well as Broken Code (for example from an update gone wrong) will often, but not always, end up with the WHITE-WHITE code error pattern.
**) Should one of these severe failures ever happen during a firmware update, it is very likely that the device is now bricked, containing a partial or broken code update and thus rendered inoperable and refusing to take further updates.
It then should be returned to factory for servicing.


=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 - 04.
Firmware Version Identification C15 Documentation / 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 / Firmware Version Identification (Blink Pattern after Power Up) Firmware Version Identification (Blink Pattern after Power Up) To identify the current firmware version in the device, a specific blink pattern is displayed after power has been applied via one of the USB ports: The first LED blinking YELLOW for N times, like, say, two times:Major Revision Number is N = 2 Then, second LED blinking CYAN for K times, say, three times:Minor Revision Number is K = 3 Effective firmware Version is N.
K, with K displayed with two digits.
For the example:Version = 2.
03 There might be additional blink patterns following after the firmware version, like both LEDs blinking RED three times which indicates the used firmware is a special beta/test version.


=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 - 05.
Firmware Update C15 Documentation / 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 / Firmware Update Firmware Update Important note The MIDI Bridge only accepts a firmware update when *no* MIDI traffic has occurred since power-up, otherwise it will simply try to deliver the MIDI data on the other port as in normal operation.
Fully disconnect the MIDI Bridge.
Connect MIDI Bridge to PC only (which port used on the MIDI Bridge does not matter).
For Linux Users, using amidi (www.
systutorials.
com/docs/linux/man/1-amidi/): find hardware port ID with amidi -l, say it was hw:1,0,0 for example send SysEx with amidi -p hw:1,0,0 -s nlmb-fw-update-VX.
YZ.
syx(X.
YZ must be replaced with the actual firmware number) For Windows/Mac users: use an application like MIDI Tools (mountainutilities.
eu/miditools) load the Firmware SysEx file send it to MIDI Bridge If the firmware update was successful, the MIDI Bridge will show that by both LEDs blinking fast in bright GREEN color and then will reset itself after 5 seconds, afterwards showing the new Firmware Version during startup.
If the update failed, try again the full cycle from step 1 (note: try using also the other port of the MIDI bridge).
Optional Firmware Version Check (besides the visual Firmware Version Display): Software like MIDI Tools must be restarted and then will show the new firmware version of a connected Bridge in the setup screen.
on Linux, use the command usb-devices | grep -C 6 -i nonlinear Windows hint To remove stale entries potentially causing wrong display of the device name, go to device manager, select show hidden devices, then delete all NLL-Bridge entries.
Do this while the MIDI Bridge is *not* plugged in, of course.


=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 - 06.
Hardware Port Speed Identification C15 Documentation / 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 / Hardware Port Speed Identification Hardware Port Speed Identification Technically, both ports of the Bridge are USB2.
0 compatible but only one port offers the maximum speed of 480Mpbs (High-Speed), the other runs at 12Mbps (Full-Speed).
Both speeds are way beyond the data rates that will normally ever be used or needed by MIDI, though.
Only when an USB bus is almost saturated by other than MIDI traffic there could be cases where one wants to connect the High-Speed port of the Bridge to a specific bus.
The High-Speed port side of the Bridge can by identified during the LED pattern display of Firmware Version, it is located at the side where the first blink pulse is seen, in yellow (see chapter Firmware Version Identification).


=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 C15 Documentation / 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 - 01.
Features C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 / Features Features Support for almost all types of expression pedals and damper pedals of different technology and connector pin-outs.
Further, many model-specific pedal presets can be selected for optimized performance.
Support for Control Voltage as additional type of controller.
Auto-Ranging to fully use the available electrical travel of a pedal.
Auto-Hold to de-noise and stabilize the controller output.
Controller parameters (like current Auto-Ranging internal settings) are continuously saved, and re-loaded after power-up.


=== Pedal Manual ===

 - 02.
Quick Start C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 / Quick Start Quick Start If the pedal has a detachable cable, then first connect a suitable cable to the pedal.
If the pedal has a minimum volume setting adjust (like many Roland and Boss models do), set it to the fully counter-clockwise position.
Connect the pedal cable to the C15 at one of the TRS Sockets numbered Pedal 1...4.
The C15 may already be powered on or off, it does not matter.
If on, try to insert the cable quickly into the TRS socket (in less than 1 second).
Go to Setup > Device Settings > Pedals and select the proper type for the pedal from the pedal presets list.
If your pedal is listed explicitly then please use that setting.
Otherwise, try the generic Pot, Tip-Active (also known as Boss/Roland pin-out) or Pot, Ring-Active (Yamaha pin-out) presets.
Do the Auto-Ranging cycle: Move the pedal to one end stop of its mechanical travel, wait a moment (1 second), then move it to the other end stop, wait a moment.
Check if the position indicator in the Pedal Editor screen moves evenly and over the whole range of 0%...100% when operating the pedal over the complete travel.
When using one of the generic Pot settings and you find that the approximate center position gives a way too high (or too low) reading, try the corresponding generic pedal presets with the swapped pin-out (swap tip active with ring active).
During operation, when you find that the pedal does not move over the complete 0%...100% range anymore, reset the Auto-Ranging by temporarily selecting another pedal type.
Alternatively, you can pull the cable from the TRS socket and re-plug it.


=== Pedal Manual ===

 - 03.
List of Pedal Presets C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 / List of Pedal Presets List of Pedal Presets Name/Type Remarks Pot, Tip-ActiveContinuous Generic 3-Wire Expression/Damper Pedal, Tip-Active (Roland pin-out).
If there is a min control, set it fully counter-clockwise.
If there is a range control, set it fully clockwise.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 5%, 5%.
Auto-Hold strength: medium.
Pot, Ring-ActiveContinuous Generic 3-Wire Expression/Damper Pedal, Ring-Active (Yamaha pin-out).
If there is a min control, set it fully counter-clockwise.
If there is a range control, set it fully clockwise.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 5%, 5%.
Auto-Hold strength: medium.
Pot, Tip-Act.
Rev.
Continuous Generic 3-Wire Expression/Damper Pedal, Tip-Active (Roland pin-out).
Reversed output vs.
pedal travel.
If there is a min control, set it fully counter-clockwise.
If there is a range control, set it fully clockwise.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 5%, 5%.
Auto-Hold strength: medium.
Pot, Ring-Act.
Rev.
Continuous Generic 3-Wire Expression/Damper Pedal, Ring-Active (Yamaha pin-out).
Reversed output vs.
pedal travel.
If there is a min control, set it fully counter-clockwise.
If there is a range control, set it fully clockwise.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 5%, 5%.
Auto-Hold strength: medium.
ResistorContinuous Generic 2-Wire Adjustable Resistor, Tip-Active.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 5%, 5%.
Auto-Hold strength: medium.
Resistor, Rev.
Continuous Generic 2-Wire Adjustable Resistor, Tip-Active.
Reversed output vs.
pedal travel.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 5%, 5%.
Auto-Hold strength: medium.
Switch, ClosingBi-Stable Generic 2-Wire Switch, Tip-Active.
100% Output in closed position.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 1%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
You can use most tip-active expression and damper pedals as switches, too.
Switch, OpeningBi-Stable Generic 2-Wire Switch, Tip-Active.
100% Output in closed position.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 1%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
You can use most tip-active expression and damper pedals as switches, too.
CV, 0...5VContinuous Control Voltage, Tip-Active, Fixed Range: 0...5V.
Auto-Ranging: off, Auto-Hold strength: weak.
Do not apply voltages outside a 0...5V range.
Do not apply ANY voltage when the unit is off.
CV, 0...5V(Auto-Range)Continuous Control Voltage, Tip-Active, Auto-Ranging within 0...5V.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 1%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
Do not apply voltages outside a 0...5V range.
Do not apply ANY voltage when the unit is off.
 OFF  Use this to fully ignore a pedal even when connected.
E:Boss EV-30Continuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Tip-Active.
Set min controls to fully counter-clockwise.
For direct reverse action, use output EXP2 set to INV.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 2%.
Auto-Hold strength: medium.
E:Boss FV-500LContinuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Tip-Active.
Set min control to fully counter-clockwise.
Use EXP output.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 1%.
Auto-Hold strength: strong.
E:Doepfer FP5Continuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Ring-Active.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 4%.
Auto-Hold strength: medium.
E:Fractal EV-2Continuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Tip-Active.
Use EXP output.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 1%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
D:Korg DS-1HContinuous 2-Wire (Resistor) Damper Pedal, Tip-Active, Reverse Action.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 3%, 7%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
E:Korg EXP-2Continuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Ring-Active.
Use output 2.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 6%, 2%.
Auto-Hold strength: medium.
E:Lead Foot LFX-1Continuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Tip-Active.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 1%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
E:M-Audio EX-P (M.)Continuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Tip-Active.
Set min control to fully counter-clockwise.
Set bottom switch to M-Audio.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 1%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
E:Moog EP-3 (std.)Continuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Tip-Active.
Set range control to fully clockwise.
Set bottom switch to Standard.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 8%.
Auto-Hold strength: strong.
D:Roland DP-10(cont.)Continuous 3-Wire Damper Pedal, Tip-Active.
Set switch to Continuous.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 7%, 1%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
E:Roland EV-5Continuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Tip-Active.
Set min control to fully counter-clockwise.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 2%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
D:Yamaha FC3AContinuous 3-Wire Damper Pedal, Ring-Active, Reverse Action.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 4%, 1%.
Auto-Hold strength: weak.
E:Yamaha FC7Continuous 3-Wire Expression Pedal, Ring-Active.
Auto-Ranging dead-zones: 1%, 2%.
Auto-Hold strength: strong.


=== Pedal Manual ===

 - 04.
Connection C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 / Connection Connection Some expression and damper pedals have detachable cables.
Typically, a 3-wire TRS cable should be used with TRS plugs on both ends.
But there are certain battery- or mains-powered switching pedals that use the ring contact of their TRS jack to close an electric circuit to power up the pedal, for those only use a 2-wire cable with TS-plugs on both ends and the cable must first be connected to the switch before plugging into the C15, otherwise the function might not work properly and the input might even be damaged.
In general, always connect the cable to the pedal first before plugging it into the C15.
When connecting a Control Voltage source provided by, for example, a CV output from an analog synth, it is recommended to follow these steps: Check that the CV output does produce output voltages only within the 0V...+5V range, eg.
do NOT connect to sources that range from -5V to +5V or 0V to +10V etc.
Switch off both the source and the C15 before making the cable connection.
CV input is recognized only on the tip of a TRS or TS plug, with the sleeve being the ground reference.
The ring contact is not used.
Switch on the C15 first, then the CV source.
For switch-off, reverse that order, that is, switch off the source first, then the C15.
You may need to do a pedal reset and restart Auto-Ranging for the CV, 0..5V(Au- to-Range) pedal presets after the C15 is fully up and running by selecting a different pedal preset temporarily.
It is important that the cable, no matter what type of source, is plugged in quickly into a running C15 (in less than one second).
Otherwise, the Auto-Ranging function may not work properly because of wrong initial values being detected.
For the same reason, sources with detachable cables must first be connected to the cable before plugging the cable into a running C15.
When a pedal or other source is unplugged during operation of the C15, the last readouts sent to a connected Macro Control may have arbitrary values not related to the actual pedal setting.
Do NOT connect anything else to the C15 than passive expression and damper pedals, passive mechanical switches, and, with some care, control voltage sources and powered switch pedals, otherwise damage may occur.
Please consult Nonlinear Labs (info@nonlinear-labs.
de) if there are any questions.
Also make sure that you never mistakenly connect any audio TRS cables for the audio signal chain (mixer, amp) to the pedal jacks as that may produce very loud and dangerous thump-sounds from the speakers or the main PA.


=== Pedal Manual ===

 - 05.
Setup C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 / Setup Setup The setup for the pedals, switches and CV sources is simple.
Navigate to the Pedal Settings either using the Panel Unit or the Graphical User Interface and select the proper type from the list of presets.
There are several groups of presets: generic presets for expression and damper pedals generic presets for switches generic presets for control voltage sources specific presets for a variety of commonly used expression and damper pedals, listed alphabetically by make and model.
Expression pedals start with the prefix E:, whereas damper pedals start with D:.
Please try to find your expression or damper pedal in this list first.
Use one of the generic presets only when the pedal is not listed.
In most cases either Pot, Tip-Active or Pot, Ring-Active then will work, but you might try other compatible presets as well (compatible in that they have the same general type and connector pin-out).
an OFF pedal preset, intended to fully deactivate a pedal without having the need to unplug it.
If you are using a pedal preset not matching the general type of your actual pedal or  source, unexpected results with regard to produced output values may occur.
Neither the C15 nor the pedal/source, though, are any likely to be damaged when selecting a wrong pedal preset (but please read the warnings with regard to control voltage sours and battery- or mains-powered switches, at any rate).


=== Pedal Manual ===

 - 06.
Usage C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 / Usage Usage Auto-Ranging of the pedal travel After a pedal has been plugged in while the C15 is running, or after selecting a different pedal preset, most pedal presets require an Auto-Ranging cycle where the available electrical travel produced by the pedal is measured and used for the corner points.
Note that until a reasonable range of movement has been detected the pedal will not produce any output signals.
The procedure is simple: move the pedal to one mechanical end stop, then wait about one second.
move the pedal to the other mechanical end stop and again wait a second.
Checking the Auto-Ranging and general pedal characteristic After the Auto-Ranging procedure, you might want to check if all is well, that is a) the pedal output spans the whole 0%...100% range and b) that the output characteristic is reasonable, producing about 50% output when the pedal is at around the mechanical middle position.
Both checks can be done by watching the pedals position bar graph and the corresponding numerical display in the Pedal Editor.
Should you find that the output value at the approximate mechanical center position is way off from the 50% mark, something like 80...90% * or so, then the pedal likely requires a different setup with tip and ring connections swapped.
That is, if you see this behavior and have currently selected Pot, Tip-Active, then select Pot, Ring-Active, and vice versa.
On the other hand, a unique feature of the C15 is that a pedal generally keeps working even when selecting the wrong pin-out, you just get a somewhat skewed characteristic of output values vs.
mechanical travel.
* When you are using the reverse readout presets like Pot, Tip-Active, Rev., Pot, Ring-Active, Rev.
etc, you will instead get a 10...20% reading for the mechanical center position in case you have accidentally selected the swapped pin-out.
Resetting the Auto-Ranging The current internal settings for the Auto-Ranging of a pedal are stored and kept in non-volatile memory so there is no need to run the Auto-Ranging procedure each time the C15 is powered up.
There are several cases, though, when a pedal might not reach the complete 0%...100% span and a reset of the Auto-Ranging will be required: The pedal has a minimum or range control that has been touched, reducing the effective electrical travel.
The pedal has been replaced with another, different pedal while the C15 was off,notably when changing between compatible types.
The C15 has no way of knowing that you changed the pedal and will continue to use the internal settings it had found and stored for the original pedal.
in rare cases, both the pedal hardware and/or the electronics may have developed significant drift and the full 0%...100% range isnt reached anymore, for continuous output pedal presets types.
There are two ways to reset the Auto-Ranging: unplug and re-plug the pedal, at the C15 side (and note the need for the re-plugging procedure be finished in less than one second), while the C15 is running.
or simply select a different pedal preset temporarily, then select the original pedal preset again.


=== Pedal Manual ===

 - 07.
Pedal / Source Types C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 / Pedal / Source Types Pedal / Source Types Expression and Damper Pedals with Continuous Output Most expression and damper pedals use a 3-wire cable and have a TRS plug.
The basis of their operation is the voltage divider principle, using a potentiometer: A voltage is applied to the potentiometer and the wiper is moved by the pedal action.
The readout is taken from the voltage at the wiper divided by the applied voltage.
The wiper is internally attached either to the tip of the TRS plug (this is the Tip-Active pin-out, also known as Boss/Roland pin-out) or the wiper can go to the ring contact of the TRS (the Ring Active pin-out, also known as Yamaha pin-out).
However, there are a few pedals, for example the Korg DS-1H damper pedal, that work internally with a simple adjustable resistor whose value changes with pedal action.
Such pedals use only 2-wires (even when a TRS plug is used at the cable end).
Here, the read- out is basically directly proportional to the resistance value.
The C15 supports this type of pedal provided that the adjustable element is connected between tip and sleeve contacts of the TRS or TS plug (tip active, which is the standard case, though).
Some expression and damper pedals can be switched between continuous and switch modes, please set such selectors to continuous position.
Some expression pedals, for example many Roland and Boss models, have a minimum volume control on the side or the front of the base, please set this control to its lowest position (fully counter-clockwise) for best results.
The C15 can also handle those pedals correctly even with this minimum volume set to other positions but resolution and stability may be compromised (see Auto-Ranging and Auto-Hold feature descriptions).
Some expression pedals, for example some Moog models, have a range control on the side or the front of the base which restricts the maximum value the output can reach and that includes zero output if the control is set fully counter-clockwise! Please set this control to the highest position (fully clockwise) for best results, otherwise again resolution and stability may be compromised (see Auto-Ranging and Auto-Hold feature descriptions).
Some expression pedals, for example some Moog and M-Audio models, have a pin-out selector witch, typically on the bottom of the base, where the used connector pin-out can be selected.
Often, this switch is marked with the pedals brand name on one side and other on the other side.
The provided pedal presets indicate the required setting for some known pedals.
For other pedals, please select the pedal brand name position which typically selects the Boss/Roland (Tip-Active) pin-out which is the preferred pin-out.
Some expression pedals are intended to be used with external cables, therefore make sure to use a correct cable (usually 3-wire with TRS connectors on both ends).
Some pedals are multi-function and have several output jacks.
Please use the output explicitly marked as Expression, Exp or similar.
Damper pedals (pedals which go back to their normal rest position when foot pressure is absent) come in two varieties.
The first type produces minimum output in the rest position that increases when the pedal is pressed, and the other type does exactly the opposite, going from maximum output to minimum output when pressing the pedal.
The C15 has pedal presets to handle either type correctly.
All continuous pedal presets of the C15 use both the Auto-Ranging and Auto-Hold feature (see Auto-Ranging and Auto-Hold feature descriptions).
There is no output from the pedal source until the Auto-Ranging has completed which requires that the pedal is moved across at least some fraction of its total travel.
You may use a physical switch as well for a continuous output, it will just jump between  the extremes (0%, 100%) with only one or two intermediate values.
When using a physi- cal switch, select one of the Resistor types of presets.
Switches with Bi-stable Output Switches are also supported, technically a switch is handled like an adjustable resistor with the values only jumping between zero resistance (closed) and infinite resistance (open).
While Auto-Ranging is used for the provided Switch presets as well, a difference is that a switch pedal gives output to a Macro Control immediately, the Auto-Ranging does not have to be completed.
A best guess initial value is used for the output which is reflecting the correct state in 99% of the cases.
The main difference is that the output of the switch, feeding the Macro Control, is chang- ing only between 0% and 100% endpoints and there are never any intermediate values, thats why its called bi-stable.
Note: You may perfectly use a continuous-type pedal for a switching type of response, the Auto-Ranging feature makes that work for potentiometer as well as adjustable resistor types of pedals.
The only restriction is that the pedal must be of the Tip Active type.
Control Voltages Control Voltages can be used as an additional source type.
A typical example would be the CV output of an LFO in an analog synth.
Two pedal presets are available for this, one with Auto-Ranging to automatically adapt to the voltage range the source actually sends, creating the full 0%...100% span, and another pedal preset with a fixed range of 0V (=0%) to 5V (=100%).
Note: The frequency of a modulated control voltage should not be larger than a few Hz, higher frequencies might produce strange results and the Auto-Ranging (if used) might not be working as intended.
Warning: The voltage range of the CV source must be within 0V...+5V.
Never connect sources with other output ranges (like -5V...+5V, 0V...+10V, etc) as they might damage the C15, regardless of selected pedal preset.
Also, do not apply a control voltage while the C15 is switched off.


=== Pedal Manual ===

 - 08.
Features explained C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 / Features explained Features explained Auto-Ranging Many pedals dont have their electrical output fully follow the mechanical position over the complete travel, there are mechanical dead zones where the electrical output does not follow the mechanical position anymore.
There is nothing we can do about this.
But many pedals also have the additional effect that the internal element (potentiometer or variable-resistor) in the first place is not used over the full range that it does have electrically, this is depending on the construction of the pedal.
We have found pedals that dont go any further than 70% or so, for example.
Further, some pedals have additional control knobs to intentionally limit the output range in some way, very common is a minimum control that introduces a sort-of base value that is added to the actual setting.
For example, the minimum control on Roland and Boss pedals can be dialed in to give a base value of 80% at the pedals zero position and the output value will increase to 100% when moving the pedal to the full position, spanning only 20% of the possible range.
Finally, the already restricted obtainable electrical output range often is not very stable at the range ends, this is mostly for mechanical slack and other mechanical issues, notably on pedals with a construction that is not extremely rigid, mechanically.
The C15 is designed so that all pedals will always actually reach the full value output from 0% to %100 regardless of the above short-comings and almost regardless of any setting of additional minimum and range control knobs found on the pedal.
By this, you can change pedals and that wont alter the playing experience at all just because the raw pedal behaves differently.
In the Auto-Ranging process running continuously in the background, the C15 measures the maximum electrical range the pedal has produced so far and sets marker points for the conversion (scaling) to the final 0%...%100 range (black area in below drawing).
The measured electrical range can only increase over time of usage and once it is large enough for a successful scaling -- larger than about 1/4th of maximum range -- the pedal actually starts to produce output values.
The only way to make the used electrical range smaller again is to reset the pedal.
Once the pedal has been operated over the full range of mechanical travel the pedal will work with best resolution and stability.
The marker point values actually used for the computation are slightly backed off from the measured min and max values.
These electrical dead-zones (gray) allow that unstable electrical end point outputs will still give stable 0% or 100% output at the end stops but they also slightly reduce the effective range of pedal travel, so this is a trade-off.
Ranging and stability characteristics for pedals of known make and model are stored in pedal-specific presets, for best results.
The Auto-Ranging is reset when the pedal is (re-)plugged into a running C15 or when the pedal type is changed in the Pedal Settings.
Auto-Hold When using several hardware sources like two pedals or a pedal and ribbon feeding the same Macro Control, we do not want to always update the Macro Control with the source that produced the last change following every minute amount of change.
Value updates shall only happen when the user is apparently moving the hardware sources position intentionally, whereas small variations from general electric noise but also from mechanical vibration etc.
shall have no effect.
As long as the input is only noise and random fluctuation the final output value shall not change.
On the other hand, when the user really operates the pedal the value should track what the user meant no matter how minute the changes are as long as they look reasonable.
Therefore, a compromise solution is needed and this is the C15s intelligent automated track-and-hold.
Normally, for fast and wide enough value changes, the track-and-hold mechanism is in track mode and the output strictly follows the momentary input (black).
At point A, a window detector (dotted rectangle) decided that the momentary values are considered stable now for long enough, then a new output value (blue) is set up to reach an averaged level after a short time (at point 2), using a ramp (red).
This output value is then frozen, held constant until the current margins of tolerance are hit, marked by point B in time, from where track mode is used again.
A ramp (red) is used again to steer the output back to the train of momentary values.
The system is in hold state between points A and B and the output value is frozen as denoted by the blue horizontal line.
The values-are-stable window can be different than the tolerance window, and some specific settings are used for known pedals.
Further, these windows partly adapt to the signal situation dynamically.
As can be seen, ramps are not necessarily linear (straight lines).
Actually, a ramp creates a cross-fade between two value trains, neither of which needs to be a constant value over time.
Technically, the ramps are generated by ramping down a factor from 1.
0 to 0.
0.
This factor is newly calculated for every point in time along the ramp and applied to deter- mine the contribution of the two value trains.
For example, the ramp starting at point A is a cross-fade from the momentary input values to the sequence of the average values of the sliding window.
The last value from this train of averages (dashed line) is calculated from the input values between points 1 and 2, and this determines the final value of the cross-fade at point 2 from where on the value is held constant.
Not shown here, when the momentary values change very slowly but eventually drift beyond margins another ramp is generated but the hold state remains active with the tolerance window shifted up or down one window height.
Also, the detector always scans for fast and wide shock changes where hold mode is left and any active ramp speeds are tightened up to very quickly follow the momentary output again.


=== Pedal Manual ===

 - 09.
Troubleshooting and Tips C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 / Troubleshooting and Tips Troubleshooting and Tips 9.
1 The selected pedal type is not working.
When I repeatedly move from end stop to end stop, I dont see any values changing in the Pedal-Editor First, select a different pedal preset temporarily then go back to the intended one and check again, or unplug and re-plug the pedal.
Check if the general pedal preset type is correct for the pedal (if, for example, you have selected Resistor for a standard 3-wire pedal that is ring-active, you will never get any output from that because the C15 is sensing on the wrong pin).
Check it the plug is inserted fully in to the C15.
Check if the cable itself is not broken.
Set any minimum knobs to fully counter-clockwise, and any range knobs fully clockwise.
Check if any switches are set properly.
Check that the Expression jack is used with multi-function pedals.
9.
2 The pedal has very uneven output over the mechanical travel Quite likely you have selected a pedal preset with the wrong pin assignment for a 3-wire Pedal.
Try swapping tip-active with ring-active pedal presets and vice versa, and auto- range the pedal after a pedal preset change.
Also check if any pin-out selector switch is in the correct position, those are often at the bottom of the pedal base and are prone to change position unintentionally when handling the pedal.
If that doesnt fix it, there is a rare chance that the pedal is not using a linear potentiometer but you might also happen to have used the wrong output jack of a multi-function pedal.
Always use the output that is marked with EXP, Expression or similar.
9.
3 I dont get the full 0% to 100% span of output values anymore when I move the pedal from end stop to end stop Its possibly time to redo the Auto-Ranging as some characteristics of the pedal have changed which the C15 could not track, like a re-adjusted minimum level control on the pedal.
Unplug and re-plug the pedal at the C15 or select a different pedal preset temporarily, then auto-range the pedal again.
In rare cases you might want to select a compatible pedal preset that has larger electrical dead-zones to catch unstable values at the end stops.
Those are D:Roland DP-10 (cont.), E:Moog EP-3 (std.) and the generic presets.
See table of pedal presets for details.
9.
4 The pedal output is high (100%) at the start position and low (0%) at the end position Try using a pedal preset with reverse output, those are available for the generic 3-wire potentiometer pedals as well as for 2-wire resistors, and of course for switches.
9.
5 The pedal output is very drifty and shows suddenly changing values Check cable for broken conductors.
Note: If you are using a tip-active pedal (Roland pin-out) you might be able to save the gig by using the Resistor setting.
9.
6 The pedal constantly overwrites a shared Macro Control with new values even when I dont touch it The pedal might have developed additional mechanical and electrical slack and instabil- ity over time and should be serviced or replaced.
When it is a tip-active pedal preset, you might try to change to the E:Moog EP-3 (std.) pedal preset which is set up for about the strongest Auto-Hold behavior.
Likewise, when you feel to have the opposite problem with the pedal not reacting close enough to pedal movement, you may want to try the E:Fractal EV-2 pedal preset which is set up only weak Auto-Hold behavior.
Again, useful only for tip-active pedals.
With ring-active pedals, you can still try the other ring-active presets, also from the generic list and see if you get better results.
See table of pedal presets for details.
9.
7 Can I use a continuous pedal as a makeshift solution for a true switching pedal? You may perfectly use a continuous-type pedal for a switching action (using one of the Switch presets), the Auto-Ranging feature makes this work for potentiometer as well as adjustable resistor types of pedals.
The only restriction is that the pedal must be of the Tip Active type.
9.
8 Can I use a switch as a makeshift solution for a true continuous pedal? You may use a physical switch as well for a continuous output, it will just jump between the extremes (0%, 100%) with only one or two intermediate values.
When using a physical switch, select one of the Resistor types of presets.
Again, the restriction is that the switch must be of the Tip Active type.
9.
9 Can I use powered/active (relay- or electronic-switch based) switchers? With some caution this will work as expected.
There are certain battery- or mains-powered switching pedals that use the ring contact of their TRS jack to close the internal electrical circuit, for those only use a 2-wire cable with TS-plugs on both ends and the cable must first be connected to the switch before plugging into the C15, otherwise the function might not work properly and the input might even be damaged.


=== Pedal Manual ===

 C15 Documentation / 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 User Manual C15 Documentation / User Manual 

=== C15 User Manual ===

 User Manual - I.
Safety C15 Documentation / User Manual / Safety Instructions, Precautions Safety Instructions, Precautions Warning Symbols This symbol indicates a risk of electric shock.
This symbol indicates important operating and maintenance instructions for the unit in the user manual.
Power Supply Please use only the included power adapter.
If this is not possible, obtain a power adapter with the following specifications: 18 - 20 V DC 2.
5 A or higher Plug inner contact: 2.
5 mm (+) Plug outer contact: 5.
5 mm (-) Do not use a power adapter with different or unknown specifications, as this may electrically damage the device! You use a non-original power adapter at your own risk.
Nonlinear Labs is not liable for damage caused by use of non-original power adapters.
Things to avoid doing Do not place the C15 on a soft surface (pillow, mattress, etc.) as this can block the circulation of air to the device while it is being used.
The C15 is an electrical (and electronic) device: do not allow water to come into contact with it.
Do not open the C15.
The inner parts of the instrument compose an intricate network which is easily damaged and potentially hazardous for inexperienced users.
Do not use the C15 in extreme ambient temperatures.
Stable performance cannot be guaranteed in very hot or cold conditions.
Also avoid high humidity and other difficult conditions.
Always wait for the device to shut down completely before you disconnect its power supply.
Do not disconnect the power supply during performance.
Doing so can cause data to be lost.
Pedal Integration The C15 provides four (TRS sockets) allowing for the integration of external pedal controllers.
As pedal controllers come with a wide variety of different behaviors and functionalities, there are a few things to consider in order to integrate them correctly.
The 

=== Pedal Manual ===

 will guide you through every step and aspect of connecting and setting up a pedal controller to the C15.
Use it to avoid invalid integration of pedal controllers, which may lead to overheating or permanently damaging the C15.
Once your pedal controllers are safely connected to the C15 and fully operable, it makes sense to explore them as a part of the .
In chapter Basic Concepts, the general modulation concept can be found.
Furthermore, chapter Using Hardware Sources provides a detailed explanation of Hardware Sources and all their aspects and properties.
User Manual - II.
Package Contents C15 Documentation / User Manual / Package Contents Package Contents C15 Unit C15 Unit Supply adapter and cable two Brackets with Screws printed Quick Start manual Cable USB flash drive The USB flash drive contains: the Factory Preset Collection the complete C15 User Reference The flash drive is specially formatted for installing updates.
Do not format it and keep it safe! User Manual - III.
Device Overview C15 Documentation / User Manual / Device Overview Device Overview Unit Unit Panel Group Selection Button Selection Indicator Indicator Panel Unit Display Buttons Unit Display Unit Control Panel 1 2 Socket Volume Volume Screw Bracket Outputs (line level, balanced) Connectors Connector On/Off Button and LED Supply Connector Cable User Manual - 01.
Introduction C15 Documentation / User Manual / Introduction Introduction The C15 is an instrument for the performing musician, designed for playability and detailed sound editing.
Its unique sound character ranges from crisp and organic to complex and experimental.
The top-quality semi-weighted keybed drives a digital synthesis engine which responds with a wide spectrum of sound colors and intensities.
As a dedicated real-time instrument, the C15 is built for human control.
There are no modulation sources or sequencing modules to create rhythmic patterns - we leave this to the musician.
Instead, the C15 is a decidedly responsive instrument which combines high-resolution keys, ribbons, and pedal inputs.
Almost every parameter on the C15 can be selected directly by pressing a button.
In other words, while all functions are software-defined, they have a dedicated haptic control surface.
In addition, a User Interface is available, which can be displayed and edited on any device with a browser application and Wi-Fi.
Like many classical instrument builders, we have chosen wood for most parts of the housing.
All other parts are made of steel or aluminium.
Along with the excellent keyboard with monophonic , there is a specially-designed ergonomic (pitch) , two very long (touch-strips), and inputs for up to four .
Symbols and formats used in this manual Certain keywords appearing throughout the manual are highlighted.
, keyword Important notes are highlighted as such and begin with an exclamation mark: &#xE171;.
This is an important message.
Similarly, a hint or a background information starts with an i symbol: &#xE162;.
This is some additional information.
When using the 

=== Developer Mode ===

, additional information will be visible: &#xE173;.
This is some additional developer information or comment.
A section which explains a user interaction or task has a (primary) heading on a grey background.
Interaction Press a specific ...
Typically, such a task will be first explained for the Unit.
If available (most cases) an explanation for the UI and/or Unit will follow.
This type of heading has a lighter background.
Click on a specific ...
...
About this manual The following chapters refer to different important aspects of using the C15.
Each chapter excludes the broader picture by focussing only on the crucial related aspects.
Nevertheless, the manual attempts to cover as many details as possible.
When you use the manual, it is best to be sure you have identified the subject you are interested in before you look something up.
The following overview explains how the manual is structured: Setting up the C15 Please read this chapter before you assemble the C15's components for the first time.
Basic Concepts This chapter outlines the general approach to the C15, explaining how to perform with it, how the modulation mechanism works and how everything is organized.
User Interfaces This chapter explains how to actually use the instrument.
The navigation methods, editing and access to presets are described in detail for each available interface.
The Synthesis Engine All signal- and DSP-related aspects are covered in this chapter, including details on signal synthesis and flow, tutorials, and details on the integration of Sources.
Recorder This chapter explains the Recorder feature of the User Interface.
MIDI This chapter explains the MIDI features of the C15.
Setup (C15 System Settings) When you have already gained some familiarity with the instrument, the setup chapter provides insight into the C15's advanced system settings.
Keep in mind that the HTML Manual provides some external links to the web, such as the Nonlinear Labs download section, for example.
However, these links will only work when an internet connection is active, which is usually not the case when accessing the HTML Manual by using the C15 UI (because the connection is already in use for the Wi-Fi hotspot, provided by the C15).
When connected with the C15, a second Wi-Fi adapter can be used in order to access the internet from the mobile device in parallel.
User Manual - 02.
Setting up the C15 <!-- --> <!-- C15 Documentation / User Manual / Setting up the C15 --> <!-- Setting up the C15 --> User Manual - 02.
1.
Installing the Panel Unit C15 Documentation / User Manual / Setting up the C15 / Installing the Panel Unit Installing the Panel Unit Make sure the C15 is switched off before proceeding in the following four steps: Attach the Brackets to the Unit by hooking and snapping them into place.
Place the Unit onto the installed Mounting Brackets.
The two Screws on the bottom of the Panel Unit fit into the holes at the top of each Mounting Bracket.
Tighten down the Mounting Screws to lock the Panel Unit into place.
Connect Unit and Panel Unit with the Cable.
Now the C15 is ready to use and can be switched on.
In order to disassemble the paired configuration, undo above four steps in reverse order.
The C15's Base Unit can also be used without the Panel Unit.
User Manual - 02.
2.
Connections C15 Documentation / User Manual / Setting up the C15 / Connections Connections The following external connections are provided by the Unit: Output The headphone output provides a 6.
3 mm stereo headphone socket with separate, preset-independent adjustable headphone level.
The headphone socket is suitable for all kinds of headphones but we strongly recommend to turn down the level when connecting low-impendance ear plugs.
The headphone level is independent from the main output level (see below).
Level The line output level is adjustable by the potentiometer at the right end of the front bar.
Connectors The audio output provides two parallel line-level stereo pairs of audio sockets (6.
3mm TRS and XLR).
Both pairs of sockets provide identical signals.
The signals are transformer-balanced and ground-free, therefore in most cases a DI-box is not necessary.
Unbalanced and balanced plugs can be connected.
When connecting to unbalanced inputs please use unbalanced cables and plugs.
Note that using both TRS and XLR outputs at the same time may cause hum.
Cable For removing the cable pull the plastic housing of the connector.
Avoid to stress the Connector Cable.
Connectors Four 6.
3 mm pedal sockets are provided for external pedal control.
In general, any keyboard controller pedal can be connected.
However, we recommend continuous pedals as they allow for the most nuanced performance.
Connecting Pedals and mapping Hardware Sources Most factory presets use the mapping shown below.
For more information on Sources, and especially modulation aspects, refer to chapter Using Hardware Sources.
The USB connection is used for plugging in the USB flash drive included with the C15.
The drive is used for transferring preset Banks and installing Updates.
The Bridge as well as external MIDI devices can be connected here as well.
The C15 comes with its own external power adapter, which connects to the power inlet.
A small LED next to the inlet indicates the power, boot and shut-down status of the C15.
User Manual - 02.
3.
Start and Shutdown C15 Documentation / User Manual / Setting up the C15 / Start and Shutdown Start and Shutdown To turn on the C15, press the power button for around one second.
It will take several seconds for the device to boot up and be ready to use.
The most recent settings are loaded on startup.
To shut down the C15, press the power button again for around a second.
The shutdown process takes several seconds, during which it stores the current settings for the next startup, before the device turns off.
A small LED next to the power inlet indicates the C15's status as follows: steady on on/normal operation slow flashing booting up fast flashing shutting down one flash every 2 seconds standby A flickering LED indicates abnormal operation.
For instance, it may mean that the supply voltage is too low.
Make sure not to disconnect the power supply while you are using the C15 (booting up, performance, shutdown), otherwise its data may be lost.
User Manual - 02.
4.
Setting up a device for the Graphical User Interface C15 Documentation / User Manual / Setting up the C15 / Setting up a device for the Graphical User Interface Setting up a device for the Graphical User Interface Concept The C15 is designed for flexible operation and interaction, with the Unit being necessary for connections and performance.
In addition, the Unit provides the User Interface, with access to all parameters, presets and settings.
Finally, the Base Unit also provides a Wi-Fi hotspot for connection to external devices like smartphones, tablets, laptops and desktop computers.
When connected, the User Interface can be accessed with a browser running on the external device.
Multiple external devices can be connected simultaneously, and each can display different features.
However, only one parameter can be focussed on at a time, which synchronises the Hardware User Interface with each external connected device.
Furthermore, the Wi-Fi connection can be used for preset interchange, and hence the option to back up preset banks to the external device.
The C15 Reference is also accessible in the browser.
System Requirements Due to the browser-based implementation of the Graphical User Interface, there are almost no limitations concerning compatibility with operating systems and browsers.
Basically, the only system requirements are that the device must be Wi-Fi capable and have a browser.
However, given the vast variety of devices, operating systems and browsers, optimal performance cannot be guaranteed in all cases.
Differences between browsers, fast changes in technologies and frequent updates contribute to a complex situation which makes it very hard to say what works best.
Nevertheless, our experience in the development of the system enables us to make some recommendations and state some minimal requirements: The device should have at least a 1 GHz processor and 2 GB RAM.
The device's display should support multi touch, or a mouse should be connected.
A connected or integrated keyboard is useful for using the Graphical User Interface.
The device should have at least a 7'' diagonal display.
Although the choice of browser is completely up to the user, currently (September 2020) the best performance is given by Google Chrome.
If you encounter problems with your setup, try to restart your device or change to another browser (or device).
If not, or if the problem won't go away, please contact us directly for help.
We appreciate feedback and user reports and will do our best to solve your problem as soon as possible.
Wi-Fi Settings To set up a well defined Wi-Fi connection, enter the Menu on the Hardware User Interface ( Button) and navigate to System Info.
Here, all relevant aspects of the Wi-Fi connection are listed: Device Name You can name your C15 instrument by focussing on the device name entry and pressing to access the Rename Screen.
Once the name is set, an SSID will be generated.
The SSID is composed of a prefix (NL-C15-) and the name you just gave to the instrument.
SSID A Wi-Fi network with the same name as the SSID will be displayed when you scan for available networks on your external device.
Connecting to this network enables your external device to control the C15 with a browser.
The SSID is generated once during the booting process, so you will have to reboot the device when you rename it.
Passphrase The network connection is secure, so a passphrase is needed to establish a connection.
To connect to the network with your external device, use the displayed passphrase to confirm.
The passphrase can be generated randomly by focussing on the corresponding entry and pressing .
Select and run the command generate new.
If you suspect that the passphrase is no longer secure (because it has been shared with someone), a new passphrase should be generated.
Address 192.
168.
8.
2 Once the connection is established, copy and past the address into your browser's address bar and the Graphical User Interface should appear in your browser.
The Wi-Fi connection can also be disabled to provide a more secure setup and prevent anyone else controlling the device remotely.
This may be especially useful when performing live.
Enter the Setup Menu ( Button) and navigate to Device Settings.
At the bottom of the list, find Enable/Disable WiFi and change the setting.
If you encounter problems navigating the Setup Menu intuitively, please refer to chapters User Interfaces and Setup (C15 System Settings).
Browser-specific issues As already mentioned, there may be restrictions on some browsers, as there is no real standard on functionality.
We do our best to keep track of browser-specific issues and offer solutions if we can find them.
<!-- Please refer to the Known Issues document for more information.
--> User Manual - 02.
5.
Pedal Integration C15 Documentation / User Manual / Setting up the C15 / Pedal Integration Pedal Integration As mentioned, the safe way of integrating pedals into the system would be when the C15 is switched off.
After all connections were made, the C15 can be switched on and all connected pedals will be recognized and integrated accordingly.
For more information about pedal integration, refer to chapter Using Hardware Sources.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts Basic Concepts Interacting with the C15 There are multiple ways to interact with the C15, each consisting of a different organisation and optimized layout of the information it represents, depending on the interface you are using.
However, the basic structure and handling options remain comparable, as each form of interaction follows the same underlying principle.
This chapter covers these general concepts, terms and keywords in detail, and explains the various means of interaction with the User Interface and User Interface, along with the modulation mechanism and presets.
Overall, three interfaces are available: The Base Unit The Unit provides access to all performance-related items ( Sources, ).
It can also be used to edit parameters and navigate presets and banks.
Navigation of parameters may be provided in future upgrades to the system.
The Panel Unit The Unit can be used to select and edit parameters, modulation controls and system settings.
Presets, banks and the undo history can all be navigated and managed here.
In short, all the C15's data can be controlled with the Panel Unit.
Four Panels, are provided, each consisting of 24 Selection Buttons.
Most of the parameters can be accessed this way.
The Graphical User Interface The User Interface also provides full access to all parameters, modulation controls and system settings.
However, it also offers more extensive helper features and settings, such as access to the C15 Documentation.
Since version 21-26, a dedicated View and are also available as separate tabs in your browser.
Key Range of the C15 Key Range prior to version 20-12 In earlier versions, the C15 only operated on its physical key range of 61 keys (C1 ...
C6).
The Note Shift was applied as a tuning, whereas Split Point and Fade From or Range parameters were bound to the physical key range, effectively ignoring the Note Shift.
Polyphonic Key Pan in the Output Mixer was also bound to the physical key range, also effectively ignoring the Note Shift.
With this static behavior of key ranges on polyphonic Part association, fade level and panning, it became apparent that there are limitations.
Key Range since version 20-12 In this version, a virtual key range of 128 keys (C-2 ...
G8) was added.
The physical key range of 61 keys is now projected onto the virtual key range, depending on the Note Shift (which is now a real key shift and not a tuning anymore).
Extreme Note Shift may exceed the virtual key range for certain keys, in which case no note is produced.
Split Point and Fade From or Range parameters now operate within the virtual key range and the Note Shift can be used to transpose into or out of parts.
The parameters still can only be set within the physical key range (C1 ...
C6) - which will be addressed by a future update.
Polyphonic Key Pan in the Output Mixer now also operates within the virtual key range and the Note Shift can be used to transpose into or out of more extreme panning.
At 100%, the panning starts to clip at the physical key ranges edges (C1 ...
C6), at 47.
24 % the panning covers the whole virtual key range (C-2 ...
G8).
About this chapter Each Interface allows you to interact with a number of elements (most of which are contained in presets).
We explain these items and their features in general terms in this chapter (the individual interfaces are explained in full detail in chapter User Interfaces).
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Bender and Ribbons C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Bender and Ribbons Bender and Ribbons The two 800 mm (touch strips) are equipped with 33 LED dots.
They can be used as Hardware Source in absolute or relative mode, each combinable with individual return behavior (zero or center).
The magnetical loaded can be used for bending pitches or other parameters.
Read how to assign a Control to Hardware Sources here.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Base Unit Control Panel C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Base Unit Control Panel Base Unit Control Panel With the Control Panel you can for example transpose the keyboard ( Shift), switch absolute/relative Ribbon modes or select banks and presets in stand alone mode (without the Unit).
Here you can find out more about its functionality.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Headphone Connectors and Volume C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Headphone Connectors and Volume Headphone Connectors and Volume The 6.
3 mm stereo headphone socket is suitable for all kinds of headphones but we strongly recommend to turn down the level when connecting low-impendance ear plugs.
The output level is independent from the main output level (adjustable by the right hand potentiometer).
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Output Volume C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Output Volume Output Volume The main output level is preset-independent and determines the signal gain for the audio outputs.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Audio Outputs C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Audio Outputs Audio Outputs The audio output provides two parallel line-level stereo pairs of audio sockets (6.
3mm TRS and XLR).
The signals are transformer-balanced and ground-free, therefore in most cases a DI-box is not necessary.
Unbalanced and balanced plugs can be connected.
When connecting to unbalanced inputs please use unbalanced cables and plugs.
Note that using both TRS and XLR outputs at the same time may cause hum.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Connector Cable C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Connector Cable Connector Cable For removing the cable pull the plastic housing of the connector.
Avoid to stress the Unit Connector Cable.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Pedal Connectors C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Pedal Connectors Pedal Connectors This connection setup is used for most factory presets.
Read here how to integrate pedals to your setup and mapping them to Controls.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Power Connector, LED and Button C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Power Connector, LED and Button Power Connector, LED and Button The C15 comes with its own external power adapter, which can be connected to the corresponding appliance inlet.
A small LED next to the inlet indicates the power, boot and shut-down states of the C15 as follows: steady on on/normal operation slow flashing booting up fast flashing shutting down one flash every 2 seconds standby A flickering LED indicates an irregular operation mode.
It means for example the supply voltage is too low.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - USB Connector C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / USB Connector USB Connector The USB connection allows for plugging in the USB stick, which is part of the C15 package.
Via USB, preset banks can be transferred and updates can be installed.
Read here how to export and restore backups via USB.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Edit Panel C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Edit Panel Edit Panel Edit Panel The Panel in the center of the Unit consists of the Unit Display and several additional buttons, representing the main means of interaction with the User Interface.
Selected parameters can be edited, settings, presets and banks can be navigated and manipulated, and some global parameters can also be found here.
User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Parameter Panels (left) C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Parameter Panels (left) Parameter Panels (left) Parameter Panel 1 The two Panels on the left side provide parameters for (A, B, C), (A, B) and (A, B).
When using the Screen, the two panels will represent a keyboard input, with each button representing a specific key (see The Rename Mechanism for more information).
Parameter Panel 2 User Manual - 03.
Basic Concepts - Parameter Panels (right) C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Parameter Panels (right) Parameter Panels (right) Parameter Panel 3 The two Panels on the right side provide parameters for (Comb, S.
V.
Filter), (Feedback, Output), and .
When using the Screen, the two panels will represent a keyboard input, with each button representing a specific key (see The Rename Mechanism for more information).
Parameter Panel 4 User Manual - 03.
1.
Sound Types C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Sound Types Sound Types Originally, the C15 only supported Sounds, where all voices are controlled by the same set of parameters.
Since version 20-28, Sounds and Sounds are available consisting of two (, ).
Each Part can use up to 12 voices based on its own parameter set - so most parameters will be available twice, per Part.
In Sounds (&#xE0F2;) the Parts are assigned to two separate keyboard ranges.
Part I can be played between the lowest key (C0) and the Split Point, Part II between the Split Point and the highest key (C6).
The Parts have separate voice allocations, which means that they can have different settings for Mono and Unison.
The Split Point is not affected by the Shift function, the Master Tune or the Part Tune.
In Sounds (&#xE0F5;) each voice of Part I will be played simultaneously with the corresponding voice of Part II.
Both Parts share the same voice allocation, which means that they have identical settings for Mono and Unison.
Note that held Keys will reset when loading whole Presets or Parts of different types.
User Manual - 03.
2.
Performance (Keybed and Hardware Sources) C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Performance (Keybed and Hardware Sources) Performance (Keybed and Hardware Sources) The , arguably the most important performance input, provides polyphonic control over notes (currently 24 voices) and monophonic (as shown above).
The semi-weighted, high quality Keybed is produced by Fatar, and has 61 keys (5 octaves).
Apart from its integrated monophonic Aftertouch, seven further monophonic Sources can be used in performance.
(The entire modulation mechanism is currently monophonic.) These are: the , two (see above) and four external (as shown below: a continuous pedal and a switching pedal) can all be integrated into the system for expressive play.
While performing, notes can be played (on the Keybed) and movements made (with the Hardware Sources) to bring motion and variation into your sound.
The eight Hardware Sources are the first of three modulation stages.
They gather the user's performance input and distribute the hardware source movements to the six Controls.
The Hardware Sources work in various ways, depending on the behavior and settings of the individual sources.
These are detailed in chapter Using Hardware Sources.
User Manual - 03.
3.
Macro Controls C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Macro Controls Macro Controls Since version 20-28, there are six additional parameters that don't have any connection or effect by default.
These are the Controls, and they represent the second of three modulation stages.
The Macro Controls are modulated by the Sources, whereas the synthesis engine parameters themselves are modulated by the Macro Controls.
The Macro Controls can thus be seen as the hub of the modulation mechanism, which distribute the control movements of the Hardware Sources to the synthesis engine's parameters.
The function of a Control is defined by the sound designer.
It acts as a primary tool for varying the sound, as Macro Controls are both interactive (they can be edited) and performant (they can be modulated by the Sources).
User Manual - 03.
4.
Parameters C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Parameters Parameters Items that are relevant for synthesis are called and are organized in Groups.
Each group combines all parameters relating to a given synthesis engine process (such as an envelope).
Some parameters are integrated into the modulation mechanism and can be referred to as Targets.
Currently, there are 286 parameters, organized into 21 groups, and 105 of these parameters act as modulation targets.
User Manual - 03.
5.
Modulation Scheme C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Modulation Scheme Modulation Scheme The modulation mechanism translates the movements made by the performer (using the Hardware Sources) into movements of the parameters, thus increasing the variation and expression of the preset being used.
The C15 does not have automatic modulation processes (like LFOs - with the exception of the ): all modulating movements are made by the performer.
In the sound engine, almost all parameters operate as smoothers.
The Time depends on the instrument's settings and the operational context.
The Smoothing Time applies for adjusting parameters, the Time for preset recalls and the Smoothing Time for modulations.
In a given preset, the flow of movements is defined by several parameters, which weight the amount and direction of a particular movement.
Each Source features a separate amount for each Control.
Multiple Hardware Sources can be used to control any given Macro Control.
The parameters have an MC selector and modulation amount, thus completing the routing of modulations.
Any given Target parameter can only be affected by one Macro Control.
How Hardware Sources affect Macro Controls essentially depends on the type and settings of the source in question, so it is hard to make any general statement.
But how Macro Controls affect target parameters is governed by general rules.
The modulation aspects of a parameter are defined in relation to both the Macro Control in question and the parameter, as neither of them changes when modulation amounts are edited.
fig.
1 fig.
2 The modulation amounts define the range within which target parameters move when the corresponding Macro Controls are moved.
As neither the Macro Controls nor the target parameters change in position, the amounts always reflect the positions of the Macro Controls within the modulation range (fig.
1).
There may be cases in which the modulation range exceeds the parameter range: this is also known as virtual overdrive.
When a modulation moves a parameter out of its operational range, it remains at the corresponding limit (clipped) until the modulation returns to within the parameter range again (fig.
2).
fig.
3 fig.
4 If we compare unipolar and bipolar target parameters (fig.
3), it is clear that the full modulation range (-100% ...
100%) of bipolar parameters is effectively twice the modulation range (0% ...
100%) of unipolar parameters.
When a target parameter has linear scaling, the modulation amount can be displayed in the same format as the parameter's unit of measurement.
Target parameters with nonlinear scaling display the modulation amount as a percentage (fig.
4).
Use this interactive Modulation Scheme for a better understanding of the modulation mechanism.
More information about Hardware Sources and the modulation mechanism can be found in chapter Using Hardware Sources.
The section Modulation Aspects explains the current standard setting, which is commonly used in the factory presets.
User Manual - 03.
6.
Presets C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Presets Presets The current sound can be stored as a preset at any time for later use.
Presets are organized into banks, so that each preset has a unique path (bank number/preset number).
Some other aspects of presets are explained as follows: Preset Name Each preset can be given a unique user-definable name.
When you store a preset, you will be prompted to name it.
You can change the name of the preset at any time.
Preset Number Each preset has a certain position in its bank.
This position and the bank number are combined to define a unique number for the preset, which displays on each user interface.
For example, the unique number 1-001 refers to the first preset in the first bank.
Preset Type(since 20-28) The Type (Single, Split, Layer) will be stored and associated with the preset.
It will be indicated for Split (&#xE0F2;) and Layer (&#xE0F5;) types.
Preset Info Each preset contains a small set of metadata, most of which are defined automatiocally when you store the preset.
Besides the device name, the software version and the time stamp, some elements can be defined by the user: You can edit the name of a preset, set its position in its bank, assign it a color tag and set a comment text.
The comment text can be used to describe the sound and give performance instructions.
In addition, the preset comment text will be checked when you search for presets using keywords.
This works especially well when keywords are defined as tags with the hashtag symbol #.
Change Recognition When you change a loaded preset, the system recognizes the change and indicates this by appending an asterisk (*) to the unique preset number.
When you store a preset after making changes to it, the system considers it to be a new preset, unless you force it to overwrite an existing preset.
More information about dealing with changes to loaded presets can be found in chapter Overviews.
Note that modulations, which change parameters, are considered to be preset changes.
User Manual - 03.
7.
Organization C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / Organization Organization All accessible items on the C15 are organized into functional groups.
Parameters are grouped according to their functional relations as part of the synthesis engine, the Sources and Controls are grouped next to each other, and other items are organized into menu structures.
The User Interface (consisting of the Unit and Unit) gives quick access to all parameters.
Most parameters are organised in groups, as reflected on the Panels.
However, not every parameter can be accessed with a single click, as several parameters may be stacked behind one Selection Button.
Furthermore, a few parameter groups (Master, Part, Unison, Mono) can only be accessed via the Button.
In the User Interface, every parameter and every bank is shown in the main area.
This requires physical space to display all the necessary information, and some screens may not be large enough or sufficiently high resolution to do so.
These limitations are dealt with by zooming into and out of the display, which is a crucial aspect of working with the Graphical User Interface, as different levels of detail emerge at different zoom levels.
User Manual - 03.
8.
The Undo Tree C15 Documentation / User Manual / Basic Concepts / The Undo Tree The Undo Tree The usual undo history of a program would be a list-like data structure.
When an editing action is tracked, it is simply appended to the list.
If you undo a number of edits, they are lost when when you make new edits.
The C15's undo history, on the other hand, is a tree-like data structure.
All editing actions are tracked and new branches are created when you undo edits and then make new changes.
Using this mechanism, there will be no loss of editing steps, as all steps and branches are accessible.
Nevertheless, an ever-growing undo tree will require lots of memory and may be capable of slowing down the system.
This can be avoided by making a certain element the new root of the tree (elements prior to that position will be lost in this case) or by deleting inactive branches of the undo tree.
Within a branch, the mechanism is quite similar to the ordinary list-based undo, providing backward and forward navigation via undo or redo.
The extended tree-based functionalities emerge when navigating to other branches.
The C15 undo mechanism tracks different user actions.
Parameter selection, edits to parameters, preset recalls and edits to presets and banks can be undone.
However, the modulation mechanism is not integrated into the undo mechanism, as it is part of the user performance.
User Manual - 04.
User Interfaces C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces User Interfaces As described, the C15 has two different user interfaces.
The User Interface consists of the Unit and Unit with their haptic ("hands on") controls.
The User Interface is available on external devices via a Wi-Fi connection, and offers a detailed representation of all parameters and presets.
Multiple devices can be connected in parallel, each focused on different aspects.
Note that all available interfaces operate in a synchronized manner, sharing the same state and focus.
The following chapters explain how to focus on items and their aspects to edit them.
User Manual - 04.
1.
Parameter Organization C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Parameter Organization Parameter Organization <!-- This chapter describes new features that where introduced on version 20-28.
--> 1 The Sources, their Amounts, Controls, Master and Scale parameters are considered global and are present only once within a Preset, regardless of the Type (Single, Split, Layer).
2 Most parameters (from Envelope A up to Reverb) are considered local and are present once for Presets or twice within a or Preset.
A few new parameters of the 3 Feedback and 4 Output Mixer are special, as they only are present, if the current Sound type is not Single (the new 3 Feedback parameters are only available if the Sound type is Layer).
5 The Voices group consists of the Unison and new Mono parameters.
The Voices group is present once within a Single or Layer Preset and twice within a Split Preset.
6 The Part group consists of the Part Volume/Tune parameters as well as the Split Point (Split Presets) or the Fade From and Fade Range (Layer Presets) parameters.
The group is only available, when the Sound type is not Single.
When a Single Sound (referred to as Source) is converted to a Split or Layer Sound (referred to as Target), global Parameters are copied entirely.
The Sources Master Volume and Tune will be delegated to Targets Part Volume and Tune.
The Sources local Parameters will be transferred to both Parts of the Target.
The Sources Voices Parameters will be transferred globally if the Target is of type Layer.
If the Target is of type Split, the Sources Voices Parameters will be transferred to both Target Parts.
Should the Source possess Unison Voices greater than 12, they will be clipped to 12.
In general, any Sound type can be converted to any other type.
In addition, Single Presets and selected Parts of Split or Layer Presets can be loaded to selected Parts of Split or Layer Sounds.
The particular transfer of Parameters strongly depends on the specific scenario and will be described in more detail in the future.
When a Preset is loaded into one of the Parts this will not change global parameters like the mapping of the Hardware Sources or the positions or names of the Macro Controls.
Parameters assigned to Macro Controls of the new Preset will be connected to the existing Macro Controls.
You need to check if this assignment works for both Parts.
It may be necessary to reassign the parameters to other Macro Controls.
Note, that when you select a Macro Control, only the modulation targets in the currently selected Part are highlighted.
User Manual - 04.
2.
Selection C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Selection Selection The C15's architecture was designed to offer quick access to all items and aspects, with one central area representing the current focus.
This main principle (of focussing on one item at a time for editing) affects each interaction on any available user interface.
As mentioned, the current focus will be shared with all involved devices.
Selection Panels provide Selection Buttons.
The corresponding LED (left of the button) lights up to indicate the current focus.
Multiple parameters can be selected with a single Selection Buttons (indicated by circles below the LED).
The Selection Buttons or Button 4 allows you to cycle through the stack.
The Button provides access to the few parameter groups that are not directly accessible on the Parameter Panels.
Button 4 redirects to the Master group, Button 3 to the Unison and Mono groups.
In Split and Layer Sounds, Button 2 redirects to the Part group, and Button 1 is available in many screens in order to change the Part in focus.
The Controls are shown as a distinct group.
Pressing a Selection Button twice redirects to the Sources.
The Unit Display provides a corresponding screen for the selected item.
The buttons of the Panel give access to all aspects of the items.
Selection All parameters are shown in the main area and can be selected by clicking on them.
In Split and Layer Sounds there is a colored frame around the main area including an indicator for the selected Part.
A touch/click on the indicator opens the parameters of the other Part.
(The User Interface has its own Part focus and will not reflect selections in the User Interface, unless it is deliberately enabled in the Menu.) The background of an element highlights to indicate that it has been selected.
Use the mouse wheel or pinch gestures on the main area background to zoom into the provided map.
A double click on a Group header zooms into the group.
Different details emerge depending on the zoom level.
High priority parameters are always visible.
Controls and Sources appear as separate groups in the main area, providing all related aspects.
The expandable tab area shows all item-related aspects.
Parameters can be edited in the Tab.
Chapters Parameters to Presets detail selected parameter- or preset-related items.
Further (menu-related) items and access to them will be explained in chapters Sound Manipulation to Graphical UI Functionality.
User Manual - 04.
3 Parameters User Manual - 04.
3.
1.
Editing a Parameter C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Parameters / Editing a Parameter Editing a Parameter Adjust Control Position, coarse Use the to adjust the current parameter.
Use the and buttons to make stepwise adjustments.
Adjust Control Position, coarse Use the Button to set 1 to Mode.
The display and the touch strip of Ribbon 1 represent the current parameter, while 2 still operates in Mode.
Adjust Control Position, coarse If the external device has a mouse or touch screen display, use drag gestures to adjust the current parameter.
(Use the Tab slider or main area element, if the GUI settings allow you to do so.) If the external device has a keyboard, you can use the K and M keys to make stepwise adjustments (K to increment, M to decrement).
If the external device has a mouse, you can also use the mouse wheel to make adjustments when the cursor is hovering over the slider in the Tab.
Adjust Control Position, fine The Button toggles adjustments to high resolution mode.
An F will display in the parameter screen.
Fine mode is normally deactivated when you change focus to a different parameter.
However, Fine mode can be enabled permanently by holding down the Button when you press the Fine Button.
Fine will now stay active until you press the Fine Button again.
Adjust Control Position, fine Hold down the Shift key to make parameter adjustments in high resolution mode.
On the slider in the Tab, you can use a pinch gesture (holding one finger while dragging another) to make high resolution adjustments.
Reset Control Position Press the Button to toggle between the selected parameters default and current value.
Reset Control Position Double click on the element in the main area (if the GUI settings allow for it) or the slider in the Tab to toggle between the selected parameters default and current value.
Control Position Edges Hold the Button and press the Button for the minimum or the Button for the maximum value.
User Manual - 04.
3.
2.
Editing the Modulation of a Parameter C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Parameters / Editing the Modulation of a Parameter Editing the Modulation of a Parameter Focus on Modulation Aspects By default, the parameters control position is in focus, and 4 can be used to cycle through the stack if there is one.
2 can be used to make a Control assignment to the parameter.
If a Macro Control is assigned, 1 and 3 are also enabled.
When you focus on a modulation aspect, 4 is also available to enable you to access every modulation aspect.
Furthermore, the Display now displays all modulation aspects.
Press 1, 2 or 3 twice to set the focus back to the parameters control position.
Focus on Modulation Aspects In the Tab, you can click on the Icon to toggle the focus on modulation aspects (if a Control is assigned, all aspects are available).
The horizontal slider represents the aspect in focus (or the control position, by default).
Elements in the main area and the parameter shown in the Tab display their modulation aspects.
Chapter Macro Controls explains the Mapping mechanism.
This provides a quick way of assigning target parameters to Controls.
MC Selector Press 2 to focus on Selector and change the assignment like adjusting a parameter.
Either none (-) or Macro Control (&#xE100;, ..., &#xE105;) can be assigned.
MC Selector Change the current MC assignment by pressing any of the six provided assignment icons (&#xE100;, ..., &#xE105;).
Click twice on an icon to clear the assignment.
This aspect will not be in focus on the slider.
MC Position Press 1 to focus on Position and adjust it like a parameter.
MC Position Click on the MC position icon to focus on Position and adjust it like a parameter on the slider.
This will cause a modulation and may affect other parameters as well.
MC Amount Press 3 to focus on Amount and adjust it like a parameter.
The modulation range is indicated separately next to the slider.
MC Amount Click on the MC amount icon to focus on Amount and adjust it like a parameter on the slider.
The modulation range is indicated separately, next to the slider and on the main area element.
Modulation Range Aspects Pressing 4 moves the focus to the rightmost stack of modulation range aspects and cycles through it.
The selected aspect can be adjusted like a parameter.
The following aspects are provided: the modulation range Limit, the (current) control position and the modulation range Limit.
If the upper or lower limit exceeds the range of the parameter, clipping is indicated by an exclamation mark.
Modulation Range Aspects Click on the Limit or Limit icon to focus on the modulation range aspect and change it like adjusting a parameter on the slider.
The control position is in focus when no aspect is selected.
If the upper or lower limit exceeds the range of the parameter, clipping is indicated by an exclamation mark.
These aspects are logically interconnected.
Changing one will affect another.
User Manual - 04.
4.
Macro Controls C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Macro Controls Macro Controls As described, Controls can modulate specific target parameters.
The most common way of using Macro Controls is to play the Sources, applying modulation during a performance.
When a Macro Control changes, all associated target parameters will start a transition to the modulated value, as specified by the Smoothing Time (a separate parameter for each Macro Control, Macro Control Properties).
User Manual - 04.
4.
1 Editing a Macro Control C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Macro Controls / Editing a Macro Control Editing a Macro Control Ribbons in Play Mode In Mode, you can play the which have been assigned to .
Use the Button to switch between modes.
Adjust Macro Control Position Adjust the selected position like adjusting a parameter.
Adjust Macro Control Position In Mode, 1 can be used to edit the selected Control.
Use the Button to switch between modes.
Adjust Macro Control Position The Tab provides all parameter aspects of the selected Control.
Adjust its position like adjusting a parameter on the slider.
Fast Mapping Press the Selection Button for a potential target parameter while holding down the Selection Button for a Control to switch the assignment on or off.
This only works for target parameters at the top of the stack.
This method only handles the actual mapping of target parameters to a Control.
Modulation amounts can only be adjusted by focussing on each parameter.
However, the modulation amounts are kept, and the last value they were adjusted to is recalled.
User Manual - 04.
4.
2 Macro Control Properties C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Macro Controls / Macro Control Properties Macro Control Properties possess several properties, defining the control's appearance and behavior.
They are either represented as context menu options, or as additional parameters.
Editing Macro Control Properties Press the Button to focus on the properties, which are held in the stack at the right.
Use 4 to cycle through the stack.
Press the Button to focus on a selected property.
Editing Macro Control Properties You can click on a menu icon in the Tab.
In the main area, right click on a Control element to call up a context menu and access its properties.
Rename and edit Macro Control Info The Screen allows you to edit the label and info text of the selected Control.
1 cancels the process, 4 or the Button confirms and applies the edit (see chapter The Rename Mechanism for details).
Rename and edit Macro Control Info A rename dialogue appears when clicking on the Rename ...
option in a context menu, and you can edit the label with your mouse and keyboard.
The Info window appears when clicking on the Parameter Info ...
option in a context menu, and you can edit the label as well as the info text with your mouse and keyboard.
Adjust Macro Control Smoothing Time When a Control is in focus, 3 (more..) shifts the focus to its Time, which determines how fast assigned parameters will respond to movements of the Macro Control.
Adjust the time like editing a parameter.
Pressing 3 (back..) a second time will shift the focus back to the Macro Control.
Adjust Macro Control Smoothing Time Below each Control, its Time is shown as a separate parameter.
Mod Reset (clear Target Assignments) When the Time of a Control is in focus, 2 (Mod Reset) is also available.
Press it and then confirm by pressing the Button and the target parameter assignments of the selected Macro Control will be reset.
Mod Reset (clear Target Assignments) Click the Mod Reset option in a context menu and the target parameter assignments of the selected Control will be reset.
User Manual - 04.
4.
3 Assigning a Macro Control to Hardware Sources C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Macro Controls / Assigning a Macro Control to Hardware Sources Assigning a Macro Control to Hardware Sources Focus on Assignment Aspects By default, the Control position is in focus.
The rightmost stack indicates the influence of each Source on the Macro Control.
Use 4 to cycle through the stack or press 2 in order to select a particular Hardware Source like adjusting a parameter.
Once a Hardware Source is selected, 1 and 3 will also be available, now providing all involved assignment aspects.
When 1 is in Mode, the selected aspect can be edited there as well (but the aspect can only be selected on the Unit).
Pressing 1, 2 or 3 a second time will return to the default focus.
HW Source Position Press 1 to focus on the current Source and adjust its position like a parameter.
This will cause a modulation and may affect other Controls and parameters as well.
HW Source Selector Press 2 to focus on the Source selector.
Use the selector like a parameter to select any of the eight Hardware Sources.
HW Source Amount Press 3 to focus on the amount of the current Source on the selected Control.
Adjust the amount like a parameter.
HW Source Selection Stack Pressing 4 focusses on the rightmost stack of Sources and cycles through it.
The eight sliders indicate the amounts of each Hardware Source on the selected Control.
The selected element in the stack represents the corresponding amount and can be adjusted like a parameter.
Access to Assignment Aspects The top-center parameter group Hardware Sources and Amounts provides access to all Sources and their amounts on Controls, represented as a modulation matrix.
Items of interest can be selected and adjusted like parameters.
User Manual - 04.
5.
Hardware Sources C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Hardware Sources Hardware Sources The most common way to use Sources is to apply modulation during performance: the movements of the Hardware Sources are distributed to the target parameters by the Controls.
However, Hardware Sources can also be used like ordinary parameters.
Keep in mind that using the Hardware Sources causes modulation and potentially affects Macro Controls and target parameters.
User Manual - 04.
5.
1.
Editing a Hardware Source C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Hardware Sources / Editing a Hardware Source Editing a Hardware Source Adjust Hardware Source Position Adjust the position of the selected like adjusting a parameter.
Using a Hardware Source has the same effect as editing the value in the display.
Adjust Hardware Source Position In Mode, 1 can be used to edit the selected Source.
Use the Button to switch between modes.
This will cause a modulation and may affect and target parameters.
The sources Behavior will be simulated when the screen changes, as indicated by an exclamation mark next to the value in the display.
Adjust Hardware Source Position The Tab provides all parameter aspects of the selected Source.
Adjust the position like a parameter.
This will cause a modulation and may affect Controls and target parameters.
The sources Behavior will be simulated when you release the element.
User Manual - 04.
5.
2.
Hardware Source Properties C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Hardware Sources / Hardware Source Properties Hardware Source Properties Sources possess one additional property called Behavior, reflecting how a source behaves when it is released (either returning to a neutral position or staying where it is).
For the and , the return behavior is fixed, as they always return mechanically.
For and , the behavior can be chosen.
The Return Behavior determines how Hardware Sources affect Controls.
For returning sources, the corresponding amounts can be set continuously.
The amounts of non-returning sources will behave like switches, either enabling or disabling full-range modulations on Macro Controls.
(The amount can not be negative in this case.) The return behavior of should match how the corresponding external pedal controller behaves when released.
Non-returning can only affect one Control exclusively and will be linked to it, meaning that both Ribbon and Macro Control will act essentially as one parameter (changes to either element will be reflected in both).
Edit Return Behavior By default, the Source position is in focus.
Press 2 in order to focus on the return behavior and adjust it like a parameter.
Press the button again in order to return to the default focus.
Edit Return Behavior In the main area, right click on a Source element to call up a context menu in order to change the Behavior.
In the Tab, the menu icon provides a context menu, providing available Behaviors for the selected source.
When adjusting the Return Behavior, no Hardware Source should be moved or held during this time, otherwise clipping problems in the modulation may occur.
User Manual - 04.
5.
3.
Mapping a Hardware Source to Macro Controls C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Hardware Sources / Mapping a Hardware Source to Macro Controls Mapping a Hardware Source to Macro Controls Focus on Assignment Aspects By default, the position is in focus.
1 to 4 provide focus navigation.
Press a button twice to return to the default focus.
One Hardware Source can be selected, and its effect on one Control can be edited.
Focus on Assignment Aspects The top-center parameter group Hardware Sources and Amounts provides access to all Sources and their amounts on Controls, represented as a modulation matrix.
Items of interest can be selected and adjusted like parameters.
HW Source Selector Press 1 in order to select a particular Source.
HW Source Amount Pressing 3 will redirect to the Amount screen, showing the amount of the currently selected Source on the currently associated Control.
The amount can be edited like adjusting a parameter.
Pressing 1 will redirect to the Hardware Source, 4 will redirect to the Macro Control.
MC Target Selection Stack Pressing 4 will cycle through the rightmost stack of Controls in order to change the current association.
User Manual - 04.
6 Presets User Manual - 04.
6.
1.
Loading a Preset C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Presets / Loading a Preset Loading a Preset Preset Navigation Press the Button in order to focus on the Screen.
The as well as the and buttons will navigate through the current Bank.
2 and 3 navigate banks.
The selection is indicated by a rectangle.
Preset Navigation The Control Panel can be set in Mode by the Button (usually by pressing the Mode Button for a second, see Base Unit Functionality).
Using /Buttons will navigate through the current bank.
Both will remain in Mode.
Preset Navigation In the main area, every bank is available and can be dragged on any position.
If expanded, presets can be selected by clicking.
In the Tab, the currently selected bank can be navigated by clicking on the corresponding navigation icons.
The Keys can be used to navigate presets (up, down) and banks (left, right).
If the external device features a mouse, the Wheel can also be used for navigating the currently selected bank in the Tab when hovering it.
Loading a Preset When loading a preset, every parameter will start a transition to the new value (specified by the selected preset).
The transition is defined by the Time in the system settings.
On the Unit press the Button in order to load the selected preset.
Loading a Preset On the Unit press the Button in order to load the selected preset.
Loading a Preset On the User Interface the Tab provides a Icon in order to load the currently selected preset.
Or click on a bank element twice.
The described load process will load a particular preset fully, meaning that individual of a or sound will be overwritten.
Note that it is also possible to load a preset (or part of a preset) into a part, meaning that the particular preset will only be partially loaded (see chapter Part Manuipulation for more details).
Direct Load The process of loading Presets can be shortened by using the Direct Load option, which allows for loading Presets directly upon selection.
On the Unit press 4 in order to toggle the Direct Load option.
Direct Load On the Unit hold the Button for a second to toggle the Direct Load option.
Direct Load On the User Interface press the Direct Load icon in the Tab in order to toggle the Direct Load option.
Bank Navigation Next to the actual presets, banks contain additional metadata (some of which can be edited, see chapter Contextual Info).
For example, they keep track of their last selected preset, which may be loaded when navigating banks (depending on the Direct Load option).
On the Unit press 1 in order to focus on banks and navigate them instead.
2 and 3 will navigate presets now.
Bank Navigation On the Unit switch to Mode by the Button.
Using the /Buttons will now navigate banks.
Bank Navigation In the Tab, banks can be navigated by the corresponding navigation icons (the left and right arrow keys can be used as well, as described.).
In the main area, clicking/touching on the header of a floating bank will select the bank, clicking/touching on a preset will select only the preset.
After loading the selected preset, the bank selection will update as well, indicating the bank containing the loaded preset.
The Direct Load option will be indicated on each interface.
The Display and the User Interface also show the preset count of a selected bank (in brackets) and the current bank-preset-number.
User Manual - 04.
6.
2.
Storing a Preset C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Presets / Storing a Preset Storing a Preset Store Select Press the Button in order to focus on the Screen and start the Mode.
The store position and bank can be adjusted by preset and bank navigation (as described in chapter Loading a Preset).
The process can be canceled by pressing the Store Button again, pressing the Button on the other hand will complete the Store process, storing the preset at the desired location according to the Store Method (see below).
Store Select The Tab provides a Icon.
Clicking/touching on it will store the preset in the currently selected bank at the current position, according to the Method (see below).
The additional Button will start the Mode and a bank and position can be chosen (without loading any preset), then the preset can be stored at the desired location (disabling the Store Select Mode), according to the Store Method (see below).
Another way of storing a preset in a particular bank or position is simply dragging and dropping the Store Icon to the desired location (the Store Select Mode and Store Method can be ignored in this case).
Store Method 4 provides three available Methods in the rightmost stack and cycles it.
Pressing the Button applies the process, pressing the Button again dismisses it.
The store position will be finally influenced by the chosen Store Method, which can be one of the following three: Append The preset will be stored at the end of the currently selected bank.
Overwrite The preset will be stored at the current position in the currently selected bank, overwriting the existing preset.
Insert The preset will be stored behind the current position in the currently selected bank.
Store Method The Method can be selected in the Tab, above the Icon.
Preset Naming If the preset is considered new, the Screen will appear, requesting a name for the preset (see chapter The Rename Mechanism for more details).
User Manual - 04.
6.
3.
Editing Presets and Banks C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Presets / Editing Presets and Banks Editing Presets and Banks Common Preset editing actions are listed in the table below: Rename The selected preset can be renamed (see chapter The Rename Mechanism for details).
Cut The selected preset will be moved into the clipboard (being deleted at the current position).
Copy The selected preset(s) will be copied into the clipboard, ready to be pasted at any time.
Paste Once a preset was copied or cut into the clipboard, this option will become available.
The copied preset(s) will be inserted behind the currently selected preset.
Delete The selected preset(s) will be deleted from the bank.
When deleting all presets of a bank at once from the Graphical User Interface, a Dialog window will appear, asking if the bank should be deleted as well.
Preset Edit Mode When the Screen is in focus, pressing the Button invokes a menu, represented in the rightmost stack.
Cycle the stack by pressing 4 in order to select a menu entry and press the Button in order to focus on an aspect.
Press the Edit Button again to return to the Preset Screen.
Preset Edit Mode In the Tab, a Preset menu button is provided.
Clicking on this button or right-clicking (or long touch gesture) on a preset element in a (floating) bank invokes the context menu, providing access to all aspects.
Common Bank editing actions are listed in the table below: New A new bank will be created.
Rename The selected bank can be renamed (see chapter The Rename Mechanism for details).
Copy The selected bank will be copied into a temporary buffer, ready to be pasted.
Paste Once a bank was copied into the clipboard, this option will become available.
The copied bank will be appended as a new bank.
This mechanism is not fully developed yet.
<!-- For more information, refer to the separate Known Issues document.
--> Delete The selected bank will be deleted.
Move left/right The bank number (position in the bank list, visible in the Screen and Tab) can be altered by moving it left (decreasing the position) or right (increasing the position).
Import/Export Single Banks can be transferred from and to external devices (see chapter Importing/Exporting Banks for more details).
The User Interface provides another way of moving a bank via the Window, where the bank number (position in the bank list) can be adjusted directly (see chapter Contextual Info for more details).
Bank Edit Mode When the Screen is in focus, pressing the Button invokes a menu, represented in the rightmost stack.
Cycle the stack by pressing 4 in order to select a menu entry and press the Button in order to focus on an aspect.
Press the Button again to return to the Bank screen.
Bank Edit Mode The User Interface provides two menus for editing banks.
There is a global menu (invoked by a right-click / long touch gesture on the background) and a local menu for banks (provided by a bank menu icon in the Tab or by a right-click / long touch gesture on any bank header).
User Manual - 04.
6.
4.
Importing/Exporting Banks C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Presets / Importing/Exporting Banks Importing/Exporting Banks The C15 provides two ways of transferring (importing, exporting) single banks in order to manage big preset collections.
When importing a bank, the bank will not be selected and no preset will be loaded.
Import and Export on USB stick When a USB stick is connected, the selected bank can be exported to it by using the option.
Any bank present on the USB stick can be selected and imported by using the option.
Import and Export on external Device The bank menu provides an option to save the current bank as a file, which will be downloaded on the external device.
The menu also includes an option to import a particular bank from a file present on the external device, which can be selected and uploaded.
Other Bank context menus (as explained in chapter Graphical UI Functionality) will also offer import and export options.
The process of transferring multiple banks can be further simplified by the C15 backup capabilities.
See chapter Backups for more details.
User Manual - 04.
6.
5.
Locking C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Presets / Locking Locking In some situations, it may be useful to load only specific parts of a preset while leaving other parts as they are.
This can be achieved by using the Mechanism, which can lock particular parameter groups and prevent the contained parameters from being overwritten by a preset recall or sound manipulations.
Parameters of locked groups can still be edited, though.
Currently, only whole groups can be locked, but a parameter-specific Lock Mechanism is intended for the future.
Locking a Parameter Group In the Screen showing the currently selected parameter, the Button provides the lock menu.
Individual lock options can be selected by pressing 4 and applied by pressing the Button.
Depending on the lock status of the associated group, the lock options provide locking the specific group/all groups, or unlocking the specific group/all groups.
When one or more groups are locked, the lock symbol is also shown in the Screen and Screen.
Locking a Parameter Group A right click or long touch gesture on a particular group header invokes the lock menu.
Depending on the lock status of the associated group, the lock options provide locking the specific group/all groups, or unlocking the specific group/all groups.
When one or more groups are locked, the lock symbol is also shown in the Tab and Tab.
Note that Sources and Amounts are two separate lockable groups.
In the , the header of the Hardware Sources and Amounts group shows two separate lock symbols.
Locking - a practical example Lets consider a situation where the user wants to use certain groups of preset A as a template for other presets (B, C, ...), which shall have those group settings as well.
Useful scenarios may be the Sources and their Amounts on Controls, or the whole effect chain.
In a few steps, the particular groups of preset A can be copied to the other presets: Load preset A (the template preset).
Activate lock on the desired groups (that shall be transferred to the other presets).
Load preset B (the locked groups still remain as defined by preset A).
Save preset B (making the template transfer persistent).
Load and then save preset C (repeating the process, the locked groups still remain as defined by preset A), et cetera.
User Manual - 04.
7.
Sound Manipulation C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Sound Manipulation Sound Manipulation The current parameter setting can further be manipulated, affecting all the parameters of a a sound (or part) at once.
Focus on Sound Screen Pressing the Button will invoke the Screen, providing options to further manipulate the current sound.
Focus on Sound Tab The Tab provides options to further manipulate the current sound.
It can be focussed by selecting the corresponding tab icon (showing a keyboard).
User Manual - 04.
7.
1.
Main Parameters of a Sound C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Sound Manipulation / Main Parameters of a Sound Main Parameters of a Sound A few parameter groups are not directly available via Buttons on the Unit, on the User Interface they are available like ordinary parameter groups.
In order to access them via the Panel Unit, press the Button.
Master: Volume, Tune and Scale On the Screen, 4 (Master..) opens the Screen, where the familiar Master (Volume and Tune) and Scale parameter groups can be found and navigated by 4.
The Volume and Tune parameters are now modulateable, so the Master Volume could still be instantly accessable when using a Control.
20-28 Voices: Mono and Unison On the Screen, 3 (Voices..) opens the Screen, which shows an overview of the Unison and Mono parameters.
Pressing 2 (Mono..) opens the Screen, making individual Mono parameters available via 4.
Pressing 4 (Unison..) opens the Screen, making individual Unison parameters available via 4.
The maximum number of Unison Voices is now 24 for sounds and 12 for a / sound.
In Layer sounds the Unison settings are applied to both .
Note that changes to the Mono Enable and/or Unison Voices parameters will reset held keys.
Mono Presets are marked with a m symbol.
Unison Presets have a u symbol.
Presets that combine both voice modes are marked mu.
More information about these parameters can be found in Main Parameter Groups and Post Processing.
User Manual - 04.
7.
2.
Manipulating Sounds C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Sound Manipulation / Manipulating Sounds Manipulating Sounds Init Sound When initializing, every parameter of the sound (or part) will start a transition to its default value, as defined by the Smoothing Time in the system settings.
In sounds, press 1 to select and then the Button to recall the Init sound.
In or sounds, press the Button, navigate to the Init Sound option using the or / and press the Button.
(There is also an Init Part option in order to only initialize the selected Part.) Init Sound The Tab contains a menu icon (...) which provides an Init option for sounds.
The menu will instead contain the Init Sound and Init Part options, when the current sound type is or .
Store/Reset Init Sound The Init Sound represents every parameter with it's default value.
The default values were carefully chosen to form a meaningful initial state (in which no sound will play, as all channels of the Output Mixer are disabled).
Nevertheless, custom defaults are also possible.
In order to store the current sound as the Init Sound, press the Button and navigate to Device Settings > Store Init Sound, then press the Button to confirm.
The default Sound Type and the parameter values will be overwritten.
In order to restore the factory defaults, chosse Reset Init Sound instead.
Store/Reset Init Sound Click on the Menu in the top-right corner and choose Setup in order to open the Window.
In the first tab (Device Settings), the Store and Reset options can be found on the bottom.
If you encounter problems navigating the Menu intuitively, please refer to chapters Setup Navigation and Setup (C15 System Settings).
Randomize When randomizing, every parameter of the sound (or selected part) will start a transition to a randomized value, as defined by the Smoothing Time in the system settings.
The randomization amount is adjustable.
Press and use the or/ to navigate to Randomize (when in a sound) or Randomize Part (when in a or sound), then press .
Now, the amount of randomization can be adjusted.
To escape randomization, press 1 or 2.
To apply randomization, press Enter.
Randomize In the Tab, press the menu icon (...) and choose Randomize (when in a sound) or Randomize Part (when in a or sound).
A dialog will appear, providing the adjustable randomization amount and an Apply button to complete the process.
Sound Manipulation and Locking As described in chapter Locking, parameters of locked groups are not affected by sound manipulations.
For example, randomizing all parameters may not be a good idea when considering the Master, Unison and Scale groups, as the random change can have too much of an impact, leading to unwanted, bad sounding or even harmful results (should the Master Volume increase considerably).
So we recommend to lock these three groups before using the randomize function.
User Manual - 04.
7.
3.
Converting Sound Types C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Sound Manipulation / Converting Sound Types Converting Sound Types Since version 20-28, , and sounds can be converted inbetween.
In general, most parameters will be available twice in / sounds, although the details are a little more subtle.
(In order to explore the part structure in more detail, refer to the next chapter Part Manipulation).
In this section, the individual conversion methods are explained.
Creating a Split or Layer Sound First, load a preset.
On the Screen press to open the Screen.
Select Convert to Split or Convert to Layer by navigating with / or the , then press .
On the Sound Screen you now see two identical .
In the User Interface, the Tab provides a menu on the left, allowing for a conversion between different sound types.
Storing a Split or Layer Sound as a Preset A or sound can be stored in the same way as a sound.
The C15 banks can hold presets of all three types.
Split presets are marked with a &#xE0F2; symbol.
Layer presets have a &#xE0F5; symbol.
Converting a Part of a Split or Layer Sound to a Single Sound While in a , or Screen, select the part to be converted by 1 (I/II).
Then press and navigate to the Convert to Single entry by using / or the , then press .
Converting a Split (Layer) Sound to a Layer (Split) Sound While in a , or Screen, press and navigate to the Convert to Layer (Convert to Split) entry by using / or the , then press .
User Manual - 04.
8 Part Manipulation User Manual - 04.
8.
1.
Main Parameters of a Part C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Part Manipulation / Main Parameters of a Part Main Parameters of a Part Part Volume and Tune In / sounds, the Volume and Tune of a Part can be adjusted by its Part Volume and Part Tune parameters.
The stereo signals of both are mixed before the Master Volume control.
The Master Tune is added to the two Part Tunes.
When a Sound is converted to /, its former Master Volume and Master Tune will be copied to its Part Volume and Part Tune while Master Volume and Master Tune are set to zero.
When a Sound is loaded into a or Sound, its former Master Volume and Master Tune will also be copied to its Part Volume and Part Tune but Master Volume and Master Tune stay unchanged.
When a of a / sound is converted to , the Master Volume and Master Tune values are summed up with Part Volume and Part Tune to create the Master Volume and Master Tune of the Single Sound.
Furthermore, the delegation of the Master Volume/Tune to the Part Volume/Tune parameters also includes potential assignments to Controls.
In Dual (/) sounds, the Part Volume/Tune is designed to serve as the potential Master, should the Part get converted to again.
In order for this to work properly, we recommend not to create Control assignments to Master Volume/Tune within Dual Presets.
Or to be more precise: these assignments will be discarded, when converting a Dual Preset back to Single.
User Manual - 04.
8.
2.
Parameter Organization C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Part Manipulation / Working with Parameters of Split or Layer Sounds Working with Parameters of Split or Layer Sounds When editing a / Sound in the Screen, 1 is labeled I/II and can be used to access the parameters of both parts.
A square with two part indicators show which part is in focus.
On the User Interface there is a colored frame around the main area including an indicator for the selected part.
A touch/click on the indicator opens the parameters of the other part.
By default, both and User Interfaces share the same part focus, meaning that part selection is reflected everywhere.
However, the User Interface has its own part focus and can ignore part selections in the User Interface, if explicitly enabled in the system settings, see chapter Setup (C15 System Settings).
User Manual - 04.
8.
3.
Split Sound Details C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Part Manipulation / Split Sound Details Split Sound Details Adjusting the Split Point On the Split Screen the Split Point is shown in the center.
It can be edited directly by the and /.
If I is selected it shows the highest key of the lower key range.
If II is selected it shows the lowest key of the upper key range.
The Split Point is also available as a parameter in the Screen.
Use 2 (Part..) to open it.
On the Screen, navigate with 4 to the third parameter.
The Split Point parameter can be controlled by a Control.
As Hardware Source, a ribbon will make a lot of sense.
The part association of individual voices happens only when a key is pressed, according to the current value of the Split Point.
By default, the Split Point is linked - meaning that both don't overlap (see Overlapping Split Points below in order to produce intersections).
Adjusting the Split Point In the User Interface, the Tab provides the Split Point between the two parts.
Use drag gestures in order to change it.
In addition, the group (left to the Master group) provides the Split Point as a regular parameter, which can be manipulated further in the Tab when selected.
Overlapping Split Points In earlier versions, the C15 only provided one Split Point parameter in a sound, determining the inner edges of both fully separated , so no overlap was possible.
The described behavior is still available by default and referred to as linked Split Points.
Now, unlinked Split Points are available as well, providing separate Split Points for each part (but still sharing one unique Control assignment).
When unlinked, an overlapping range of shared keys can be defined, in which both will sound.
The two Split Point parameters are still sticked to one another, preventing a negative overlap with a key range with no part association.
The linking behavior can be changed by the Button: When in the Screen, pressing will provide a menu with the option to Unlink/Link.
Navigate with 4 for the entry before pressing .
When unlinked, the key positions of both are shown.
Overlap can be achieved by raising the Split Point of I or by lowering the Split Point of II - using / or the .
When in the Screen, pressing will provide a menu screen.
Navigate with / or the to the Link Splitpoints option and press to toggle between the two behaviors.
When unlinked, the key positions of both are shown.
Enabling a linked Split Point will collapse any prior overlapping range.
Overlapping Split Points In the Tab, an icon on the right of the shown key position indicates the linked/unlinked Split Point behavior.
Clicking on it will toggle inbetween.
In the Tab, clicking on the ...
icon on the right invokes a menu in which the linking behavior can be set.
Split Point Editor In the Tab, the rightmost icon redirects to the Editor, providing the two parameters and an interactive visual representation.
Split Points can be set by clicking or dragging on the corresponding values or by dragging the indicators on the shown keybed.
The linking behavior can be set as well.
Signal Flow Indicators in a Split Sound In sounds, the ToFX parameter is available in the Output Mixer, allowing the mixed signal to be sent to the Effects section of the other .
When active, the flow across parts will be indicated in the Screen/Tab by labeled FX arrows.
User Manual - 04.
8.
4.
Layer Sound Details C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Part Manipulation / Layer Sound Details Layer Sound Details Key Fades in Layer Sounds Each of a sound has two parameters to control the key range where this part is mixed at its full level and a key range where it is faded out to silence.
Depending on the key position the voices are processed by an attenuator in the Level stage of the Output Mixer.
To adjust key fade aspects press the Button for the Screen, then 2 for the Screen.
4 then brings the parameters into focus.
Key Fades in Layer Sounds In the User Interface, the group (left to the Master group) provides the Fade From and Fade Range parameters, when a sound is loaded.
The full level range of I spans from the lowest key (C1) to the adjustable Fade From key.
Here begins the fade-out.
Its width is adjustable by the Fade Range parameter.
The full level range of II spans from the highest key (C6) to the adjustable Fade From key.
Here begins the fade-out.
Its width is adjustable by the Fade Range parameter.
Both parameters default to being without effect.
Possible applications for these key fade ranges: keyboard splits with a smooth transition (crossfade) between the parts one of the parts being added only at the low or high end of the keyboard crossfades over a wide keyboard range to change the resulting timbre gradually Current Limitations/Issues When a Note is stolen (all free voices are exhausted, e.
g.
by high Unison Voices, Mono enabled), key fades can produce audible artifacts (clicks) as the part volume changes immediately with the beginning Note - despite of the corresponding Voice already being audible (active).
Muting a Part of a Layer Sound On the Layer Screen you can use the and / to mute one of the : turning the Encoder to the left or using Dec will mute II.
Turning the Encoder to the right or using Inc will mute I.
The first step back to the center will unmute the muted part.
Typical screens (//) will indicate the two present parts, highlighting the selected part.
When a sound's part has been muted, a cross indicates the muted part.
On the Layer Screen the Button will provide part muting via 1.
Muting a Part of a Layer Sound The User Interface provides a Inddicator similar to the screens.
It is located centered at the top.
When a sound part has been muted, a cross indicates the muted part.
The Tab provides a mute button for each part.
Clicking on a muted parts button will unmute the part, clicking on an unmuted parts button will mute the part, potentially unmuting the other.
When muting a of a sound, only the final Part Volume stage will be affected, so any signal flow across parts will be maintained regardless.
Fade Editor In the Tab, the rightmost icon redirects to the Editor, providing all related aspects and an interactive visual representation.
For each part, Fade From and Fade Range can be adjusted by clicking or dragging on the corresponding values or by dragging the indicators shown on the keybed.
Indicators in a Layer Sound In Sounds, the ToFX parameter is available in the Output Mixer, allowing the mixed signal to be sent to the Effects section of the other .
When active, the flow across parts will be indicated in the Screen/Tab by labeled FX arrows.
In the Feedback Mixer, several parameters allow for feedback flow across .
When active, the flow across parts will be indicated in the Sound Screen/Tab by labeled FB arrows.
When Key Fades are present, they also will be indicated in the Screen/Tab by a small fade graph next to the Part Volume.
User Manual - 04.
8.
5.
Loading from/into Parts C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Part Manipulation / Loading from/into Parts Loading from/into Parts In the following, a step by step guide leads through every stage of the Load to Part process.
Although this process can be shortened, we recommend following the guide until being familiar with the stages.
We also recommend to not change the Sources or Controls during the Load to Part process, as they will affect both .
Changes on the modulation will be reflected when a part is loaded and can easily lead to unexpected assignments to modulateable parameters.
At first, a / preset has to be loaded, let's refer to it as the Target preset.
It is worth mentioning that the Screen will display Dual (Split/Layer) presets different to the already familiar presets, providing more functionality.
Also, let's keep in mind we also have another Preset somewhere, from which to load data into a part, referred to as the Source Preset in the following.
When a Dual preset has been loaded, 1/4 will now each serve two purposes.
In order to explain each individual step of the Load process, the Direct Load option should be disabled at first.
Press and hold 4 for around a second in order to do so.
Then press 4 again (shortly this time) in order to enable the To Part mode, starting the Load process.
Likewise, pressing 1 shortly will select between the two parts of the Target preset, specifying exactly where to load new data.
Press and hold 4 for around a second in order to switch to the already familiar Screen.
If multiple banks are present, / as well as the will provide bank navigation.
When in the Screen, use the or / in order to select a Source preset within the currently selected bank.
2/3 can be used in order to select another bank.
(In the Screen, preset/bank selection roles are reversed.) Of course, presets can be selected in order to serve as the Source preset, they are shown with a square.
Dual presets can be selected as well, as each individual is available for the selection.
Dual presets are indicated by two rectangles instead of a square.
When the right preset (or part) has been selected, will complete the Load process, loading the selected Source preset into the specified of the Target preset.
Note that the Load to Part process distinguishes and remembers different aspects of selection: selected Target referring to the currently loaded preset's selected part selected Source referring to the currently selected preset (if the preset is of Type ) or the currently selected preset's part (if the preset is of Type /) This means, that any time the Load to Part process is invoked, all Source selection aspects are restored as they were the last time.
In the User Interface, the Load process is comparable.
The Tab provides a To Part button when a Dual preset has been loaded.
Preset and bank navigation in the tab will behave similarly to the screens of the User Interface.
Furthermore, individual presets of visible banks in the main area can be selected by clicking, shortening the whole process, especially when Direct Load is enabled.
Presets can even directly be dragged and dropped onto a of the Tab, further simplifying the whole process.
When combining presets of different types, there are some limitations that should be considered.
(See Parameter Organization.) User Manual - 04.
9.
Contextual Info C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Contextual Info Contextual Info Parameter Info When a parameter is selected, the Button invokes the Screen, showing the current parameters description.
If the info text is too long to fit the screen, user / or the to scroll.
Parameter Info In the Tab, an Icon is provided, toggling an Info window showing the description of the currently selected parameter.
The window will update when selecting another parameter.
Macro Control Info When a Control is selected, the Button invokes the Screen, showing the description of the currently selected Macro Control.
When pressing , the user-definable info text can be edited in the Screen.
Macro Control Info The Icon in the Tab works accordingly when selecting a Control, context menus for the main area elements are also provided.
The provided Info window allows for edits on the user-definable info text.
Hardware Source/Amount Info When the focus is on a Source/Amount, the Button provides the Screen according to the item in focus.
Hardware Source/Amount Info The Info window will display the description of a selected Source/Amount as described for ordinary parameters.
Preset Info Presets contain a collection of metadata, some of which can be edited.
The metadata collection includes: a reference to the parent bank name, the preset position within the parent bank, the preset name, a comment text, a color tag and information about the last saved change (date, device name, ui version).
Preset Info When in the Screen, press for the Screen of the currently selected preset.
The screen can be scrolled by the or /.
When pressing , the comment text can be edited in the Screen.
Preset Info The preset Info window can be made visible when clicking on the preset Icon in the Tab or by a right click on a preset within a bank, selecting the show info option.
The window can be left visible and will update when loading other presets.
In addition, the global menu also provides a visibility option for the preset Info window.
In the User Interface, the preset Info window allows for editing the preset number (position in the bank), name, comment and color tag.
Bank Info Banks contain a collection of metadata, some of which can be edited.
The metadata collection includes: the bank number (position in the bank list), the bank name, a comment text, the bank size (number of contained presets), a state (indicating if unsaved changes occurred since the last export) as well as information about the last change (date), import (date, filename) and export (date, filename).
Bank Info When in the Screen (available when pressing 1 while in the Screen), press for the Screen of the currently selected bank.
The screen can be scrolled by the or /.
When pressing , the comment text can be edited in the Screen.
Bank Info The bank Info window can be made visible when clicking on the bank Icon in the Tab or by selecting show info in the context menu provided by the bank menu icon or in other bank context menus.
The window can be left visible and will update when selecting other banks.
In addition, the global menu also provides a visibility option for the bank Info window.
In the User Interface, the bank Info window allows for editing the bank number (position in the bank list), name and comment text.
User Manual - 04.
10.
Overviews C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Overviews Overviews There are different overviews provided on the Unit, enabling the user to quickly get an impression of the inner workings of a particular sound, just by a brief glance at the Panels.
Without listening to the sound or studying parameter values, certain assumptions on signal flow and modulation assignments can be easily made.
Active Overview At any time, when the Screen is in focus, active overview will be provided.
Signal-flow related parameters that are not zero (active) will have lit LEDs.
When Controls are mapped to at least one parameter, they will show lit LEDs as well.
MC Target Overview When a Control is selected, all assigned target parameters will show their assignment by blinking LEDs.
This applies to parameters that are available on one of the Panels.
MC Target Overview When a Control is selected, it will be surrounded by a red rectangle.
All assigned target parameters show their assignment by surrounding red rectangles as well.
In / sounds, the in focus is reflected.
MC Target Indicators When a Control is selected, assigned Main parameters (not available on any Panel) are indicated by literal symbols in the Control Screen.
M Indicates assignments to Master Volume or Master Tune.
u Indicates an assignment to Unison Detune.
In a sound, the in focus is reflected.
m Indicates an assignment to Mono Glide.
In a sound, the in focus is reflected.
P Indicates assignments to Part Volume, Part Tune (in / Sounds) or the Split Point (only in sounds).
Signal Flow Overview When selecting a parameter of a particular group, blinking LEDs on the Unit show where the output signal of this group is applied further in the signal chain.
(If, for example, a parameter of the Feedback Mixer is selected, the PM FB and FB Mix parameters of the Oscillators and Shapers will have blinking LEDs, if they are unequal to zero - indicating that the output signal of the Feedback Mixer is applied in these particular sections.
The Signal Flow indicator is optional and can be disabled in the Menu (see chapter Setup (C15 System Settings) for more details).
Furthermore, in / sounds, the Screen/Tab can indicate send and feedback flow across , as explained in Part Manipulation.
Changed Overview When a previously loaded preset has been edited, an asterisk (*) will be shown.
It can refer to different elements, depending on the context.
On the Unit, the Button can be used to overview or navigate to changed elements.
Presets As mentioned in chapter Presets, the Screen will indicate changes (user edits) to a loaded preset by showing an asterisk behind the unique number.
When changes occured to a loaded preset, holding the Button while in the Screen will show the Changed Overview on the Unit, as changed parameters will now have blinking LEDs.
Presets In the Tab, an asterisk will be shown as well.
For each changed parameter, an additional yellow frame will be shown.
The highlighting can be disabled in the GUI Settings tab of the Setup window.
Parameters When a changed parameter is selected and visible in the Screen, an asterisk behind its label will be shown as well.
Holding the Button now will redirect to the Screen, showing the loaded (original) and changed (edited) positions simultaneously.
Both can be recalled by using 2/3.
Parameters When a changed parameter is selected and visible in the Tab, an asterisk behind its label will be shown as well.
Furthermore, the previous state will be indicated left to the shown value.
When selecting the previous state, it will be recalled.
Parameter Modulation Aspects When the modulation aspects of a parameter have changed, an asterisk will be shown for each label.
When a particular modulation aspect is in focus, the Button can again be used to compare and recall states.
2/3 can be used to recall loaded/changed states and 1/4 can be used to navigate changed modulation aspects, as long as the Button remains pressed.
Parameter Modulation Aspects When the modulation aspects of a parameter have changed, the modulation icon will appear with an additional yellow frame.
After selecting the modulation icon, any changed modulation aspect will be shown with an additional yellow frame.
Except for the Macro Control selector (just indicating the previous state), any particular aspect can be focussed by selecting the corresponding icon.
With the aspect in focus, the previous state will be indicated left to the shown value.
When selecting the previous state, it will be recalled.
Scale Overview In order to quickly notice if any keys have an individual tuning (as controlled by the Scale group's Offset parameters), the Scale group provides an overview, showing if active (non-zero) offset parameters are present.
Scale Overview The active state is indicated by a highlighted bar for the Scale group in the selection stack, and when the Scale group is selected, a Reset option is provided by 1, which will set all active Offset parameters to zero when confirming with .
Scale Overview The active state is indicated by an exclamation mark ! in the Scale group header, and a Reset option is provided by the header context menu, which will set all active Offset parameters to zero.
User Manual - 04.
11.
The Undo Mechanism C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / The Undo Mechanism The Undo Mechanism Simple Undo/Redo The current, active branch can be navigated by using the /Buttons in the Panel, recalling the corresponding state immediately.
When the Button was pressed, an Undo indicator will appear in the Screen, showing that the Redo option is available.
The Screen also shows the Undo indicator, as long as no other parameter is selected.
Simple Undo/Redo The current, active branch can be navigated by using the /Icons above the tab area, recalling the corresponding state immediately.
The icons indicate which Undo options are available, as shown by their color.
Alternatively, the usual keyboard shortcuts for undo and redo can be used.
Focus on Undo History Pressing both /Buttons at once will invoke the Screen, providing full navigation of the undo history.
Focus on Undo History In the menu, the Undo History window can be shown or hidden.
It provides full access on undo-related aspects.
Navigate Current Branch The Screen can only show one branch of the undo tree.
It can be scrolled by using the or /.
The current position will be indicated by a rectangle and can be recalled by pressing .
Navigate Branches If a branch splits at the current position, pointy brackets are visible on the entry.
Use 1/3 to switch between branches.
Recalling an entry of an inactive branch will make it active.
Navigate Branches The Undo History window can be scrolled by drag gestures on the background or the scrollbar, or by using the mouse wheel.
A simple click on an element will recall the corresponding state.
As all branches of the tree are visible in this window, the branch navigation is fully integrated.
A right-click (or long touch gesture) on an element provides a context menu for further options.
The hide option will hide the selected branch, the other options follow below.
Delete (inactive) Branch When navigating an inactive branch, press in order to get the delete option.
Pressing 4 will delete the whole branch.
Delete (inactive) Branch When the selected element is on an inactive branch, the delete from here option will be provided by a right-click.
Confirming this option will delete the whole branch.
Make Element the new Root When navigating the current, active branch, press in order to get the Make Root option.
All entries and branches prior to the current position will be deleted by pressing 4.
Make Element the new Root When the selected element is on the current, active branch, the Make this the new root option will be provided by a right-click.
Confirming this option will delete all elements and branches prior to the selected element.
User Manual - 04.
12.
The Rename Mechanism C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / The Rename Mechanism The Rename Mechanism Affected Items Items that can be renamed are the labels and info texts of Controls, as well as names and comment texts of presets and banks.
Get Rename Option As previously described, renaming options will be provided when pressing in the corresponding Screen.
Get Rename Option As previously described, renaming options will be provided when invoking a context menu for corresponding items.
Rename Dialogs When the Screen is shown, the two Panels on the left or on the right side of the display can be used as a keyboard, as indicated by the keyboard layout in the screen.
The cursor can be moved by using the or /.
1 will cancel the process, 4 will apply the process.
The Rename Screen When a rename option was called, a dialog window will appear, containing an entry or textbox element.
Mouse and keyboard on the external device can be used to rename the corresponding item.
Dialogs provide OK and Cancel buttons in order to finish the process accordingly.
User Manual - 04.
13.
Setup Navigation C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Setup Navigation Setup Navigation This section explains the navigation to and within the Menu.
Refer to chapter Setup (C15 System Settings) for a detailed reference.
Focus on Setup Menu Press the Button in order to invoke the Screen.
The menu content is organized in different levels which can be entered.
Scrolling Scroll the menu by using the or /.
The position will be indicated by a highlighted background.
Enter a Submenu/Property Press or 3/4 in order to enter a submenu or a menu property, according to the current position.
Adjust a Property When focussing on a property, adjustments can be done like editing a parameter, by using the or /.
Escape a Submenu/Property 1/2 can be used to navigate back to the next higher level.
When a property is in focus, has the same effect.
Setup Window The topright menu provides the Setup option, toggling the visibility of the Setup window.
The menu content is organized in tabs which can be focussed.
In each tab, the corresponding properties are provided and can be adjusted (some properties have context menus, some can be adjusted by drag gestures, like a parameter).
User Manual - 04.
14.
Backups C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Backups Backups As previously mentioned, single banks can be imported and exported from and to either a connected USB stick or the connected external device.
In addition, the transfer of all banks at once is also provided, which allows for fast and easy backups.
We recommend creating backups of your banks regularly.
Although the C15 can hold an arbitrary number of banks, it can be helpful to keep the interface clean by not overloading it with banks, speeding up booting, backup and shutdown processes.
Using single backup files for bank collections may also be helpful for live musicians who may need to load their presets on a C15.
Saving and Restoring Backups on USB Stick In the Screen, the Backup submenu can be found, providing a Restore all Banks...
and a Save all Banks...
option.
It will be indicated when a USB stick is connected, pressing will then allow for exporting or restoring of backups.
Saving and Restoring Backups on External Device The background menu of the User Interface provides options for saving and restoring backups.
When Save all Banks as Backup File is selected, all banks will be copied into a single file which then will be downloaded on the external device.
(You will find the downloaded file at a location depending on your browser settings.) When Restore all Banks from Backup File is selected, a backup file present on the external device can be chosen and uploaded.
Please keep in mind that when restoring from a backup file, all banks currently present on the C15 will be lost.
We recommend to save a backup file before restoring in order to maintain all preset data.
User Manual - 04.
15.
Base Unit Functionality C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Base Unit Functionality Base Unit Functionality Here is a quick recap of the Unit functionality, compiling all available features into a single overview.
The Button cycles four distinct operation modes, which are explained in the following.
The functionality of the remaining buttons depends on the current mode.
The following illustration shows how to navigate between the different modes: In Play mode, both function as ordinary Sources.
If they are assigned to a Control, they will be operable.
The /Buttons can be used for transposing the whole instrument (note shift).
Pressing a single button will perform an octave shift, pressing one button while holding the other will perform a semitone shift.
The Button switches between absolute and relative behavior for the most recently used (indicated by a pointy bracket).
In Edit mode, 1 will operate as an additional Editor for the current parameter focus.
The remaining functionality remains as described for the Play mode.
In Bank mode, both remain operable as Sources.
The /Buttons can be used to navigate banks.
The Button will serve as a Direct Load switch (when held for a second).
The last selected preset of the corresponding bank will be loaded.
In Preset mode, both Ribbons remain operable as Sources.
The /Buttons can be used to navigate presets.
The Button will serve as a Load button (when pressed) or as a Direct Load switch (when held for a second).
User Manual - 04.
16.
Graphical UI Functionality C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Graphical UI Functionality Graphical UI Functionality There are some more features of the User Interface, which are not available on both /Unit.
Other features are available on both User Interfaces, but are organized in different ways.
GUI Shortcuts For a detailed reference of all available keyboard shortcuts see chapter Shortcuts for the Graphical User Interface.
User Manual - 04.
16.
1.
Presets C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Graphical UI Functionality / Presets Presets Preset Search All available presets can be searched for keywords, the search results will be highlighted until the search is canceled.
Search keywords can be logically combined by setting the logical operator (AND: every keyword has to match, OR: any keyword that matches).
The search algorithm can further be specified to include preset names, preset comments and the device names where presets originated from (as the selectable options show in the Search window).
The Zoom to all matches option will set the zoom level of the main area, so that every match is instantly visible.
The Load Highlighted Preset option enables the Previous and Next buttons to cycle through each Preset of the search result.
The currently loaded Preset has a strong highlighting.
The success of a search strongly depends on the level of documentation (meaningful preset names and descriptive comments).
Bank information (comments) are not included in the search.
Using hashtags for specific keywords can be a sophisticated method of preset search and documentation.
Preset Drag and Drop A selected preset can be dragged on other positions in a bank, into other banks or on the background.
When it is dropped, it will move to the new position (if the bank remains the same), or it will be copied to the new position (creating a new bank if it was dropped on the background).
If a preset is dropped directly on another preset (as indicated by a red background), the other preset will be replaced.
In a similar manner, banks can be dragged as well in order to change their position in the main area, or to copy their contents into other banks.
Multiple Preset Selection Bank context menus (invoked by a right-click or long touch gesture on a bank in the main area) provide an option to start and finish the selection of multiple presets.
Alternatively, the Shift key can be used to hold the multiple selection mode.
During multiple selection, presets of any bank can be added or removed from the selection (but they will not be loaded).
All selected presets can then be deleted or copied (see context menu), or dragged into any bank at any position or on the background, creating a new bank containing copies of the selected presets.
The selection of multiple presets can be finished in the context menu or by a click on the background.
Note that Preset Drag and Drop and Multiple Preset Selection are only available, if the GUI Settings (explained below) allow for context menus and drag and drop.
Preset Compare Two presets can be compared against each other, examining their individual differences.
This may be useful for distinguishing several versions of a preset that are only slightly different.
Two compare methods are available, as shown in the following: Using the multiple preset selection mechanism and selecting two presets, a context menu entry Compare ...
will be available when right-clicking on the selection.
The two presets will be compared against each other.
A right-click on any preset will provide a Compare to Editbuffer ...
option.
The preset will be compared to a copy of the Buffer (the current parameter settings).
When starting the compare mechanism by either method, the Compare window will appear, showing every parameter or aspect that differs between the two presets.
Equal parameters or aspects are not visible.
Any of the two presets can be loaded, as provided by a Load icon in the header section of the window (so, both presets can be tested and played without closing the Compare window).
When comparing a preset to the Buffer, subsequent adjustments to parameters that change the Editbuffer will not be recognized by the Compare window automatically.
The Refresh button can be used in order to get a new copy of the current Editbuffer, ensuring that the comparison is up-to-date.
User Manual - 04.
16.
2.
Banks C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Graphical UI Functionality / Banks Banks Move all Banks There is a shortcut to move all banks at the same time, provided by the global context menu (invoked by a right-click or long touch gesture on the background).
If the Move all Banks option is selected, a white rectangle will appear, surrounding all banks.
Drag gestures now allow for moving all banks to another place in the main area.
To stop, re-select the option or click on the background.
Collapse Banks The local bank context menu provides an option to collapse a bank.
A double click on a bank header has the same effect.
When a bank is collapsed, it will consume only a small space, but still provides access to all contained presets (the access is only sequential, though).
Docking Banks When dragging banks manually to certain positions in the main area, they might not align very well.
In order to create an alignment, a bank can be docked to another by dragging it close to other banks.
The bank outlines change, indicating possible docking targets (top, right, bottom, left) for the dragged bank.
When banks are docked together, they also behave as a group that can be dragged as a whole or docked to larger bank clusters.
The top- or leftmost bank of a cluster behaves as the master and will move the whole cluster when dragging it, while the other banks can be dragged away from the cluster in order to split the group back into individual parts.
Furthermore, when dragging a single bank between two banks of a cluster, it can be inserted as well.
Banks can be docked ontop of each other as a vertical cluster.
When minimizing or maximizing an individual bank, the cluster will maintain the alignment and shift the other banks accordingly.
Sort Bank Numbers The background context menu provides an option to sort the bank numbers.
This will re-evaluate their order in the bank list, which is available by sequential access in the Screen/Tab.
The new order will be affected by clusters (which will be evaluated first), and the bank positions on the main area or within a cluster (from upper left to lower right).
User Manual - 04.
16.
3.
The View Menu C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Graphical UI Functionality / The View Menu The View Menu The View menu (available in the top-right corner, indicated by a menu icon) provides quick access to crucial components of the User Interface.
The following components can be made visible or invisible (GUI shortcuts to the components are shown as well).
Setup When clicking this option, the Setup menu opens in a new window.
For more information about the Setup menu, refer to chapter Setup (C15 System Settings).
Preset Search As described, presets can be searched for keywords.
Click on this option to start a search task, opening the Search window.
Undo History All user actions are tracked and can be undone, as provided by /Icons above the tab area.
In order to have a complete overview or browse through the history, the Undo History window can be used, showing all tracked actions in a tree-like structure.
Preset Info Every preset contains metadata, such as a comment text or the creation date, for example.
All the preset-relevant information is provided by the Preset Info window.
Bank Info Similarly, banks also contain metadata which will be provided by the Bank Info window.
Parameter Info In addition, specific parameter information will be provided by the Parameter Info window.
Presets All the floating banks in the main area can also be shown or hidden, shifting the focus to the parameters.
Nevertheless, all banks still are available in the Tab.
Parameter Editor All parameters in the main area can also be shown or hidden, shifting the focus to presets and banks.
The Tab still provides the opportunity to edit a selected parameter.
However, parameters cannot be selected anymore (the User Interface still provides complete access).
Open Manual The C15 Documentation is also available as a separate HTML document, which will open in a new browser tab.
Open View, Open Open the View or (see below) in a new browser tab.
Open MC View The View is an experimental feature which allows for a more dynamic, screen-based interaction with Controls.
By clicking on this menu option, a separate browser tab will be opened, providing two XY controls and two large sliders, representing the Macro Controls.
Their positions are following mouse or touch gestures with a smoothed speed.
At the left edge, the settings can be accessed.
They contain: the amount of additional smoothing an option to assign Control &#xE102; and &#xE103; to the second XY field or to the two horizontal sliders Note that the provided smoothing times are completely separate of the Edit Smoothing Time (found in the of the Menu) as well as the Macro Control Smoothing Times (found below each Macro Control slider in the User Interface).
Open Recorder The is a new feature which allows for recording audio material, see chapter Recorder.
User Manual - 04.
16.
4.
Context Menus C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Graphical UI Functionality / Context Menus Context Menus There are several context menus available providing different functionalities (according to the context).
They all can be closed by pressing the Escape key.
Background Context Menu The Background context menu appears when right-clicking on the background.
Alternatively, a long touch gesture can be used to invoke the menu.
The menu provides global functionality such as creating a new bank, importing a bank (from the external device), saving or restoring back-ups and moving all banks at once.
Preset Context Menu There are a two ways to invoke the Preset context menu.
In the Tab, a menu icon is provided for presets.
In addition, a right-click (or long touch gesture) on a preset (in the Preset Tab or in the main area) can also be used.
The menu provides preset-specific functionalities such as handling multiple preset selection, an option to show the Preset Info window, a rename option, cut/copy/paste/delete options for selected presets, the compare option and a fast way to change the color tag of selected presets.
Bank Context Menu The Bank context menu can be invoked by the Bank menu icon in the Tab, or by a right-click (or long touch gesture) on any bank header (in the Preset Tab or in the main area).
Depending on where the Bank context menu was invoked, different functionalities will be provided.
In general, the following options are provided: create a new bank, import/export a bank (from/to the external device), an option to show the Bank Info window, a rename option, copy/paste/delete options, move left/right options and the collapse/expand option.
Parameter Context Menus Finally, all parameters and all parameter group headers also provide a context menu in order to adjust parameter-specific behaviors.
Similar to the other context menus, they can be invoked by right-clicking on an element, or by using a long touch gesture.
In the Hardware Sources and Amounts group, the Return Behavior of / can be set.
Controls provide options for renaming, viewing the Parameter Info window (showing their user-definable info text) and resetting (clearing all mappings to target parameters).
Each group header additionally provides local (affecting the specific group) and global (affecting all groups) locking options.
The Parameter context menu provides an option to get the parameter info (by showing the Parameter Info window) or view the parameter in the Tab (if not already visible).
User Manual - 04.
16.
5.
GUI Settings C15 Documentation / User Manual / User Interfaces / Graphical UI Functionality / GUI Settings GUI Settings There are some options concerning only the User Interface.
They are provided in the Menu, which can be called via the topright menu icon.
These settings are not available on the User Interface.
Selection Auto Scroll Determine if selected items should be automatically scrolled to.
Available options are Off, Parameter, Preset and both (Parameter and Preset).
Edit Parameter Determine if parameters can be directly adjusted in the main area.
Available options are Always, If Selected and Never.
In the Tab, edits are always possible.
Highlight Changed Parameters Determines, if parameters which have been changed are highlighted by yellow frames.
Context Menus Determine if context menus are available in the main area.
They can be invoked by a right-click or a long touch gesture.
Available options are On and Off.
Preset Drag and Drop Determine if presets can be moved in the main area by drag and drop gestures.
Available options are On and Off.
Display Scaling Factor Should the User Interface appear too small or big for the device screen resolution, this option can compensate.
Available scaling factors are 50%, 75%, 100%, 125% and 150%.
Stripe Brightness The main area background features a radial arrangement of lines pointing to the center position.
They can help keeping track of the current position.
Available options are Off, 10%, 25% and 50%.
Bitmap Cache Determine how objects of the User Interface should be redrawn.
Available options are On and Off.
If the bitmap cache is activated, CPU consumption on the device will decrease, but more RAM will be required.
If the cache is deactivated, CPU consumption will rise but RAM usage will decrease.
The effect of this settings strongly depends on the external device.
Show Developer Options There are some more options (beyond the usual interaction with the C15) that are not relevant for the user, but can be important for developers (when testing a device or running diagnostics of possible malfunctions).
Therefore, the Developer Options can remain hidden in usual circumstances.
If they are displayed, they can be found way above the parameters in the main area.
We recommend to simply ignore these options.
User Manual - 05.
The Synthesis Engine C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine The Synthesis Engine The C15s first synthesis engine is named Phase 22.
It can be seen as the latest stage of an ongoing, long-time development, combining and advancing experiences gained from precursor projects like Spark, Prism, Skanner and Kontour (available for Native Instruments acclaimed Reaktor series).
There has been a steady evolution and optimization of the overall architecture and signal flow, as well as the modulation mechanism and feedback structures.
This process will continue, further refining and advancing the synthesis engine.
Concept Signal Flow and Components Dual Mode Signal Flow Using Hardware Sources For a detailed reference of all parameters see chapter Parameter Reference User Manual - 05.
1.
Concept C15 Documentation / User Manual / Synthesis Engine / Concept Concept The main design goal for the Phase 22 project is to exploit digital synthesis algorithms in order to build a highly responsive and expressively playable instrument with a strong individual character.
At the same time, the set of parameters should be small enough to be easily accessible.
It is intended to harness complexity by a reduced, minimalistic engine architecture, avoiding multi-mode switches for multiple waveforms or selectable filter and effect types.
Furthermore, (almost) all parameters of the synth engine are designed to be continuous and time-variant in order to produce smooth transitions between sounds and increasing the overall sensitivity of the instrument.
The core structure is a phase modulation synth that is based on two sine oscillators and two sine shapers only (phase modulation is closely related to frequency modulation aka FM).
The combination of an Oscillator and its Envelope can be understood as a classical FM operator.
Together with a Shaper and a Feedback injection point it forms one of the two branches.
The signals from Branch A and B can be passed through the Comb Filter, the State Variable Filter or directly to the Output Mixer.
The Comb Filter is a tool for complex spectral shaping and also works as a resonator, the State Variable Filter can be applied for subtractive filtering.
Signal routing is determined by both the Output Mixer (defining the mix being passed to the effect section) and the Feedback Mixer (defining the mix for flexibly applicable feedback loops).
Both filters and the effects have a profound impact on the feedback behavior, their amplitude and phase responses determine the frequencies where the feedback can result in self oscillation.
In fact, the feedback bus is a unique and versatile feature of the synth engine, raising the perceived acoustic complexity of a sound (if taken use of).
On the other hand, the engine is also capable of producing classical subtractive and FM sounds, so a wide spectrum and variety of sounds can be produced.
The combination of the components can also be understood in a physical modeling sense, as the branches can function as exciters for the Comb Filter as a resonator, while the State Variable Filter and the effect chain work as an acoustic body, amplifier and spatial setting at once.
User Manual - 05.
2.
Signal Flow and Components C15 Documentation / User Manual / Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components Signal Flow and Components The overall signal flow of the synthesis engine is illustrated in the following diagram.
For a more detailed version click here.
The links below provide further information about particular components.
(You can access the same subpages by clicking in the blue frames in the diagram).
Envelopes | Oscillators | Shapers | Comb Filter | State Variable Filter | Feedback Mixer | Output Mixer | Flanger | Cabinet | Gap Filter | Echo | Reverb | Main Parameter Groups and Post Processing Two Oscillators and Shapers produce signals which are passed to the Comb Filter, to the State Variable Filter, and to the Output Mixer.
The filter output signals are also connected to this mixer.
The resulting mix is passed to the effect section and finally to the output.
A second mix from the filters and effects is defined for the Feedback bus.
There is a symmetric approach for the Oscillators, Shapers and Envelopes.
Envelope A, Oscillator A and Shaper A (also called branch A) are quasi-identical to Envelope B, Oscillator B and Shaper B (branch B).
Envelope C can be mapped to the filters, pitches, and feedback amounts.
User Manual - 05.
2.
1.
Envelopes C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Envelopes Envelopes The primary purpose of the envelopes is to create modulation signals according to played keys.
Their most crucial applications are certainly the amplitudes (peak levels) of the oscillators, which is predefined.
So the amplitude of Oscillator A directly depends on the signal of Envelope A, as the amplitude of Oscillator B directly depends on the signal of Envelope B.
Besides, there are other targets which can be influenced by the envelopes according to modulation amount parameters.
They are referred to in the following sections.
In total, there are four envelope signals to be taken use of.
Three of them are flexibly definable, as provided by three parameter groups called Envelope A, B and C.
Whereas Envelopes A and B are applyable in the two branches (Oscillators and Shapers), Envelope C can be used more globally for the modulations of pitches, cutoff frequencies, resonances or feedback levels.
In addition, a non-parametric Gate signal is produced and applied for feedback control and the decay of the Comb Filter.
The Gate signal is a very simple envelope that jumps to 100% intensity when a key is pressed.
When this key is released, the signal drops back to zero within a few milliseconds.
The signals of the other three envelopes are way more advanced.
Lots of parameters define the behavior of each envelope, including variable sensitivities to the velocities and pitches of played notes.
For a particular envelope (A, B or C), there are four consecutive segments defining the signal progression.
When a key is pressed, the signal starts by rising from (usually) zero to the peak level within the Attack time.
The peak level can depend on the key-down velocity, whereas the time can range between zero and 16 seconds and also can depend on the key-down velocity (shortening it for higher velocities).
The Attack curve is linear by default but can be tweaked to get a concave or convex shape.
With a concave shape it starts with a smaller slope and gets steeper, with a convex shape it is the opposite.
The time and curve of the Attack segment determine the perceived sharpness of the beginning tone.
When the signal has reached the peak level, a new transition to the Breakpoint level (between zero and the peak level) will begin.
This segment will be active within the given Decay 1 time (also between zero and 16 seconds).
It will impact the early evolution of the produced tone.
The first two segments determine the start transients, which are important for the perceived character of a sound.
When the signal has reached the Breakpoint level, the Decay 2 segment will become effective.
Within a given time, the segment will exponentially approach the Sustain level (between zero and the peak level as well).
The Sustain level defines how much the perceived tone will persist at a stationary level while holding the corresponding key.
High Sustain levels are typical for pad and organ sounds, for example.
If the Sustain level is low or zero, a percussive tone character will emerge, with the Decay 2 time controlling if it sounds shorter or longer.
The Sustain level will hold as long as the key remains pressed.
The final segment, called the Release phase will become effective as soon as the corresponding key is released.
Within a given time the signal approaches zero exponentially.
Regardless of the perceived loudness of the tone up to now, it will disappear by fading out.
Similar to the Attack segment, the Release time can be sensitive to the key-up velocity.
As explained, the key velocities can influence the perceived loudness of the tone as well as the speed of its start and demise.
In addition, the Key Tracking parameters determine how much the key position influences both the levels and times of the envelope segments.
In conclusion, an Envelope group can model quite a lot of different tonal processes with varying degrees of realism.
It can produce spiky impulses as well as long, complicated and seemingly artificial contours.
All parameters, but especially the timing are highly precise and their sensitivities to the performing user can be carefully defined as well.
Finally, three more aspects are quite worth mentioning.
Whereas the times of the first two segments (Attack, Decay 1) are well defined by (finite) transitions, the remaining two segments (Decay 2, Release) approach their destinations exponentially.
This means, the signal takes an asymptotical path towards a specific value, but actually never reaches it.
In order to define the speed of this infinite process by a particular time, the definition is as following: When the signal drops from 100% towards zero (as described for the Gate signal), after the given time the signal will be at approximately 37% still.
This relationship may sound arbitrary or random, but actually reflects countless natural processes (like the behavior of a plucked string).
Secondly and up to now, all three Envelope groups (A, B, C) have been described at once.
A major difference of Envelope C as a global modulation source is, that its Breakpoint and Sustain levels are bipolar.
This renders Envelope C more versatile and can make tonal evolutions even more complex.
At last, another note on the Release segment in the context of the modulation mechanism.
All segment times are represented as modulation target parameters, so they can be influenced by the Macro Controls.
And whereas the times of the first three segments can be precisely tuned between zero and 16 seconds, the Release Time (target) parameter can be further set to infinite, allowing the Release segment to freeze.
This allows for the integration of a Sustain Pedal, modulating the Release time up to infinity while holding it.
Envelope Amounts The oscillator and shaper groups feature several envelope amount parameters.
They can be understood as an additional multiplier for the corresponding main parameter value.
This multiplier blends between a constant signal of one and the corresponding envelope signal, as the pictures below illustrate.
As a result, the corresponding main parameter can be blended by the amount parameter between its pure value and a fully modulated version (by the corresponding envelope).
On the other hand, for pitch-related parameters (Oscillators, Comb Filter, State Variable Filter) and the State Variable Filter resonance, the associated envelope amount parameters simply weight the corresponding envelope signals, before being added to the main parameter value.
User Manual - 05.
2.
10.
Gap Filter C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Gap Filter Gap Filter The Gap Filter marks the third effect and provides further filtering of the signal.
It consists of two four-pole filters (with a damping slope of 24 dB per octave) which can run in parallel or in series.
The filter types are static, as the first filter is a highpass, followed by the second (lowpass) filter.
The filter frequencies can be determined by a Center frequency, which can be spread in the stereo field and shifted by the Gap parameter, creating an offset between the high- and lowpass filters.
The filter resonance can be adjusted as well, creating two resonance peaks in the signal spectrum.
Both filter outputs can be blended by a Balance parameter, defining a crossfade mix of the two components.
The bipolar Mix parameter determines the amount of filtering in the resulting signal, crossfading the input signal with the filtered signal.
Positive mix values mean that the filter components run in parallel, resulting in a band-reject behavior.
Negative values produce a bandpass effect, as the filter components are running in series.
User Manual - 05.
2.
11.
Echo C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Echo Echo The fourth effect is a stereo delay, providing a spatial effect of repeating echoes.
The delay time can be adjusted and spreaded between the left and right channel.
Within the local feedback, a tunable lowpass filter allows for damping, and the feedback level can be defined by an amount and a cross-feedback (feeding one channel back to the other and vice versa).
The echo can be blended into the mix by an adjustable amount parameter.
User Manual - 05.
2.
12.
Reverb C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Reverb Reverb Finally, the signal is passed to the Reverb unit, providing another spatial effect in terms of hall, room or reverberation.
The Size parameter determines how long it takes for a signal to fade out, which has a profound impact on the perceived room size.
A Pre Delay parameter can also have a strong influence in the size perception.
The local feedback behavior is determined by a Color parameter, affecting its brightness and a Chorus parameter which can lead to a less static feedback behavior.
The Reverb signal can be blended into the mix by a separate amount parameter.
User Manual - 05.
2.
13.
Main Parameter Groups and Post Processing C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Main Parameter Groups and Post Processing Main Parameter Groups and Post Processing Master Group Volume and Tune Besides the Master Volume, the Master group also contains a Master Tune parameter which can shift the whole tuning of the instrument by up to 48 semitones in both directions.
Scale The Scale group allows for redefining the scale of the instrument, which is the equal temperament by default.
The Base Key of a scale can be defined and all 12 keys of the corresponding octave can have an individual offset (up to 800.
0 cents - eight semitones - in both directions) to the equal temperament.
So a variety of different scales is achievable, including historical and traditional settings, pentatonic scalings or exotic and experimental types.
Voices Group The voicing behavior of a preset is defined by the Mono and Unison parameter groups.
In Sounds, these groups are present once and apply for all available 24 voices.
In Sounds, these groups are present twice (per ) and apply for all 12 voices of that Part.
In Sounds, these groups are present once and apply for all 12 voices of both simultaneously.
Mono When Mono is enabled, played keys will affect only one voice (or voice cluster, when using Unison).
The behavior is defined by four parameters: (On, Off) When on, only one note (containing the defined number of Unison Voices) will be playable, even when multiple keys are pressed.
As long as one key stays pressed, the release of a key will not stop the envelopes.
Note that changes to Mono Enable will reset held keys.
(Lowest, Latest, Highest) When hitting multiple keys, they are sorted by the chosen priority.
Keys matching the chosen priority determine the pitch of the Mono voice.
When releasing the priorized key, the pitch will be determined by the key with second closest priority match.
(0.
0 ms ...
16000 ms) This time can be used to create a portamento by smoothing the transitions of the pitches.
Depending on the Legato options the smoothing is applied to each pitch change or only when the keys are played in legato style (in an overlapping manner).
(None, Envelopes, Glide, Env & Glide) None No difference between legato and non-legato playing.
The envelopes will be retriggered by every key-down and the Glide parameter will be applied to every pitch step.
Env The envelopes will be retriggered only by key-downs that are played non-legato.
The Glide parameter will be applied to every pitch step.
Glide The Glide parameter will be applied only to keys that are played legato.
The envelopes will be retriggered by every key-down.
Env & Glide The envelopes will be retriggered only by key-downs that are played non-legato.
The Glide parameter will be applied only to keys that are played legato.
The new Reset parameter of the Oscillators (accessed via the Phase Button) can be set to Off to avoid glitches caused by the oscillator phases being reset at a key-down.
They become noticeable if the Release phase of the Envelopes is longer than the time between two notes.
Without the phase reset the Oscillators are free-running and the Phase parameter has no influence on the start phase.
This will also affect the sound of unison voice stacks and will effectively disable the Unison Phase parameter.
Unison The Unison group provides additional control and allows for unison voices (more than one sounding voice per pressed key).
The number of unison voices can be adjusted (one by default).
Three spread parameters can determine, how each unison voice is spread against the others: Detune can spread the pitches, Phase can spread the oscillator start phases and Pan can spread the panning of individual unison voices.
Post Processing The resulting signal (a mixture of the Output Mix and the Effects section) can be amplified or attenuated by the Master Volume parameter, before it passes through a soft clipper, preventing the signal from being clipped at the D/A converter.
User Manual - 05.
2.
2.
Oscillators C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Oscillators Oscillators The branches A and B both contain an Oscillator  a source for a sine-wave signal.
The perceived sound of a sine wave is rather simple, as there is just the fundamental, which is detected by the ear as a pitch.
It lacks any further harmonics or partials in general, so the perceived sound is devoid of any timbre.
By phase modulation, wave shaping or ring modulation, new partial tones can be created.
The resulting waveforms and spectra can vary enormously and evolve over time.
This is the foundation of a sound that later can be further manipulated by the two filters.
When a key is pressed, each oscillator synchronizes to a particular start phase.
This allows both oscillators to run in or out of phase up to the point, where they will cancel each other out.
Besides, when using unison, the individual tones can have an individual phase offset as well.
If the start phase of an oscillator is not zero, it will not start at the zero-crossing of the sine wave.
With short Attack times, a clicking will be noticeable, as sharp transients can occur in that scenario.
The frequency of an oscillator (the number of oscillations per second) is represented as a Pitch parameter, providing the familiar format of semitones and cents.
The influence of the position of a pressed key can be weighted by the Key Tracking parameter, adding to the basic tuning of the oscillator.
At 100% Key Tracking, the Oscillator pitch directly corresponds to the keyboard.
However, there are other possible influences on the pitch as a modulation target, typically by the Bender.
Envelope C can shift the pitch as well.
By taking use of the Scale group, the pitches of played notes can even be set to different scalings apart from the familiar equidistant temperament of modern western music.
If using unison in addition, a cluster of voices will sound where the Spread parameter can stretch the individual pitches apart from one another.
Even each oscillation cycle can vary in frequency, as provided by a Fluctuation parameter.
When Fluctuation is used, each cycle will have a random offset to the basic frequency.
This converts the simple sine-wave to a band-limited noise.
At high amounts, the oscillator frequency can randomly vary between 5% and 195% per cycle, which leads to a very irregular behavior and a wide-band spectrum.
The Fluctuation can also be affected by Envelope C.
In order to manipulate both harmonics and noisiness of the sine wave, phase modulation (PM, often also referred to as FM) can be exploited, as each Oscillator provides several parameters dedicated to define the complex relations of intermodulations.
Basically, if a slow modulator signal modulates the phase of another fast and tonal carrier signal, the perceived frequency of the fast signal will change over time, increasing or decreasing the perceived pitch.
The faster the modulator signal becomes, the faster the frequency of the carrier signal will change.
If both signals are periodical, new perceived frequencies may emerge and others may disappear.
In general, strong and bright spectra can emerge.
The produced sounds can be harmonic and tonal (if the ratios of the Oscillator frequencies can be expressed by fractions of small integer numbers) as well as noisy and atonal (like a metallic character, emerging from non-harmonic partials).
This strongly depends on relations that both involved oscillators would have, like their frequency ratios and amounts of phase modulation.
Difference 1) 0 3.
87 4.
98 7.
02 12 14.
04 15.
87 19.
02 21.
69 24 Ratio 2) 1/1 5/4 4/3 3/2 2/1 9/4 5/2 3/1 7/2 4/1 1) tuning difference (in semitones) between Oscillator A and B2) emerging Ratio More specifically, three modulation sources can be used in parallel for each Oscillator.
Self modulation allows a particular oscillator to feed its own signal back, adding to its phase.
This leads to a saw-like appearance of the oscillator signal and a brighter sound, depending on the modulation amount.
The corresponding parameter is bipolar, affecting the direction of the saw curve.
The corresponding shaper signal can be crossfaded into the modulation signal, further affecting the spectrum of the resulting oscillator signal.
The corresponding Envelope can also be applied on the amount.
The phase progression of a particular Oscillator can also be affected by the opposite branch (and vice versa).
Similar to self modulation, the amount can be set, the branch shaper signal can be crossfaded and the branch envelope can shape the intensity.
This allows for complex intermodulations and elevates each Oscillator to function as both a carrier and a modulator simultaneously.
The third phase modulation source is the global Feedback bus, being defined by the Feedback Mixer.
The amount can be defined and Envelope C can shape the intensity as well.
As the feedback signal can consist of polyphonic and monophonic parts, intermodulations between several (parallel) voices can occur.
In most cases, phase modulation by feedback rapidly leads to noisy behavior.
After all phase modulation sources were weighted and added, their sum will be fed to a tunable but static lowpass Chirp filter.
This can reduce aliasing effects or chaotic noisiness, when phase modulation is used excessively.
The bipolar nature of many of the involved parameters further raises the complexity and lowers the predictability of the system as a whole.
The intricate feedback network can be seen as a textbook definition of a chaotic system.
1.
Oscillator Phase Modulation 2.
Oscillator Fluctuation User Manual - 05.
2.
3.
Shapers C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Shapers Shapers Each of the two branches is completed by a sine shaper unit, which can further manipulate the oscillator signal and enhance its spectrum.
It also allows for the integration of the global feedback and a ring modulation signal.
The sine shaping mechanism can be compared to the computation of an oscillator signal, which is derived from a continuously growing phase that is folded over and over again, thus becoming periodical.
From the periodical, wrapped phase signal, a sine approximation can be calculated.
Within a sine shaper, the input signal is first amplified by a Drive parameter, which can be sensitive to the corresponding branch envelope.
Afterwards, it will be interpreted as a phase signal that will be folded.
The resulting signal could be broadly described as the sine of a sine.
Certain overtones will emerge in proportion to the Drive level.
The folding characteristic can be blended from a soft clipping behavior by a Fold parameter.
With no fold present, the shaper effect resembles more a distortion or saturation effect, producing different harmonics.
Furthermore, an Asymmetry parameter can shift the fundamental frequency by one octave.
The resulting shaped signal can be crossfaded with the input signal by a bipolar Mix amount (as previously mentioned, the bipolar nature of lots of signal components can raise the complexity when using phase modulations or feedback).
Two more signals can be blended into the mix.
The feedback signal can be fed into a branch, the amount can be sensitive to Envelope C (blendable with the Gate signal).
With the application of feedback, the global Feedback loop will be closed to some extent (depending on further settings).
Finally, the two branch signals are multiplied and each branch can blend to the Ring Modulation signal by a certain amount.
Ring modulation produces interesting patterns in the resulting spectrum, depending on the two incoming signals.
Symmetrical frequency components emerge (one with the difference of the incoming frequencies, one with the sum of the incoming frequencies).
Concludingly, the Shaper is another versatile module providing different ways to manipulate an oscillator signal.
Distortion effects are as possible as sine shaping, and feedback and ring modulation can be applied.
The shaper not only affects the signal of a branch, but can also be blended onto phase modulation sources for the oscillators.
For a better understanding, have a look at the interactive Shaper Basics Page.
1.
The first set of diagrams shows how the Drive parameter is influencing the audio signal (0 dB &hellip; 16 dB) 2.
The second set of diagrams shows how the Fold parameter is influencing the audio signal (0 % &hellip; 100 %) 3.
The third set of diagrams shows how the Asymmetry parameter is influencing the audio signal (0 % &hellip; 100 %) User Manual - 05.
2.
4.
Comb Filter C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Comb Filter Comb Filter The branch signals (A, B) are provided as sources for two different filter units, the first of which is the Comb Filter.
It is an accurately tunable delay with a versatile local feedback loop, fed by an adjustable crossfade mix of both branch signals.
The term Comb describes the effect of a signal being combined with a delayed version of itself, leading to phase interferences (which can be constructive or destructive, mainly depending on the delay time).
Certain harmonics of the input signal can be amplified or canceled, so the spectrum is affected.
Furthermore, the term tunable refers to the relationship between the delay time of signal repetitions and a perceived tonal frequency, which emerges when the delay time is sufficiently small (smaller times produce higher frequencies, as usual).
The Pitch parameter of the Comb Filter can be sensitive to Key Tracking and the influence of Envelope C.
The delayed signal is passed to the local feedback branch, which includes two filter components.
At first, a two pole allpass filter is applied, which has a tunable frequency which can be sensitive to Key Tracking and the influence of Envelope C and a resonance.
Allpass filters do not affect the amplitudes of certain frequency components (as high- or lowpass filters do), but they will affect the phases of these components, which are comparable to individual delay times.
Below the (center) frequency, the phase shift is minimal (zero), rising to 180 degrees at the frequency and then to 360 degrees above the frequency.
The Resonance parameter defines the slope of that shift.
This mechanism has a profound effect on the signal spectrum, as it can both create and destroy harmonic signal components.
The allpass filter is followed by a lowpass filter, damping higher frequency components according to a tunable pitch parameter which can be sensitive to Key Tracking and the influence of Envelope C.
The damping effect is closely related to acoustic processes (as substances like air have this property).
It also affects the persistence of the local feedback.
The amount of feedback determines how long it takes for the feedback to disappear after the input signal has faded out.
This exponential process is referred to as the Decay Time, which can be sensitive to Key Tracking (modeling a tendency some musical instruments possess, like strings tend to dampen faster with higher notes).
The Decay parameter is bipolar, as negative feedback amounts can cancel every second repetition, effectively tuning the signal down by one octave.
The signal of the Gate envelope can also be applied to the local feedback loop, reducing the amount to a certain degree when a key is released (so the Comb Filter feedback only remains for sustained notes).
The delay time can additionally be modulated by a crossfade mix of both branches, determined by a Phase Modulation parameter (as mentioned, in certain scenarios, delay times and phases can closely relate).
So in a general sense, the Comb Filter can act as a tunable, delay based resonator that can strongly alter the spectrum of the incoming signal due to its integrated allpass filter.
The following diagram shows a simplified frequency response for the Comb Filter.
Consider a tonal signal (with a clear fundamental frequency) which feeds the Comb Filter.
The Comb Filter output is added to the signal (upper graph) or subtracted from the signal (lower graph).
Both graphs show the typical, generalized frequency response of a comb effect, as shown by the periodical peaks.
The width of the peaks depends on the Comb Filter's pitch parameter (equivalent to a delay time), meaning that certain signal frequency components will be attenuated and other components will be amplified, depending on the delay time.
In addition, when subtracting the Comb Filter signal from the incoming signal, the peaks are shifted, and the emerging comb tone will be lowered by one octave.
User Manual - 05.
2.
5.
State Variable Filter C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / State Variable Filter State Variable Filter The second applyable filter to the branches is called the State Variable Filter, a tool for multifunctional subtractive filtering that is fed by an adjustable crossfade mix of both branch signals.
The Comb Filter can be faded into the input mix as well.
The State Variable Filter consists of two two-pole filters with blendable characteristics (lowpass, bandpass, highpass) which can operate in parallel or in series by a continuously adjustable amount.
In serial mode, the damping slope can be raised from 12 to 24 dB per octave (becoming a four-pole filter effectively).
In parallel applications, the filters can also be used to create two formants (useful for vowel-like sounds).
The filter frequencies are determined by a tunable center frequency which can be sensitive to Key Tracking and the influence of Envelope C.
A Spread parameter determines how much the individual filter frequencies are shifted apart from the center frequency.
With no spreading, one peak emerges at the center frequency.
The strength of the peak depends on the filter resonance, which also can be sensitive to Key Tracking and the influence of Envelope C.
When spreading is applied, the peak splits into two peaks, weakening strong resonances and creating formants.
The filter type can be continuously blended between an overall lowpass, bandpass and highpass behavior.
In serial mode with a negative spreading, a band-rejecting (notch) behavior can be achieved as well.
A crossfade mix of both branches can also be applied for frequency modulation.
Parallel behavior can be produced in two ways, by either adding or subtracting the second filter to/from the first.
Subtraction will lead to phase cancellations.
In conclusion, the State Variable Filter is a versatile subtractive filter capable of creating formants and different characteristics.
User Manual - 05.
2.
6.
Feedback Mixer C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Feedback Mixer Feedback Mixer The global feedback signal, usable for phase modulation and within the Shapers, is defined by a mix of four signals provided by the two filters and the Effects section (blendable between pre and post Reverb).
Each signal is weighted by a bipolar Amount parameter, as the polarity can have a noticeable influence on the feedback behavior.
A sine shaper (providing Drive, Fold and Asymmetry, as described for the branch Shapers) can manipulate the sum signal and create additional harmonics.
The sum also can be amplified or damped by a Level parameter that can be sensitive to Key Tracking.
The feedback signal will be a mixture of polyphonic signals (provided by the filters) and monophonic signals (provided by the effects, having no more voice association and being a downmix of the original stereo signal).
User Manual - 05.
2.
7.
Output Mixer C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Output Mixer Output Mixer The (main) output signal, being passed to the Effects section, is defined by a stereo mix of four signals provided by the two branches (A, B) and the two filters (Comb, SVF).
Each signal can be weighted by a bipolar amount and positioned in the stereo field by a panning parameter.
A sine shaper (providing Drive, Fold and Asymmetry, as described for the branch shapers) can manipulate the sum signal and create additional harmonics.
The sum also can be amplified or damped by a Level parameter.
The key position of a note can also be applied for the tone's position in the stereo field by a Key Pan parameter.
After the output mixer, the signal will be monophonic (the sum of all voices) and at the same time dual channel (with stereo spreading).
User Manual - 05.
2.
8.
Flanger C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Flanger Flanger The first effect is a dynamic stereo delay capable of producing chorus-, phaser- or flanger-like sounds.
Its basic mechanism can be compared to the Comb Filter, although the Flanger is not sensitive to Key Tracking.
The usual sweeping effect arises when the delay time is changing (due to modulations), as the delayed signal is combined with the input signal and changing harmonics are created.
As the delay times are relatively short, this effect is not able to create wide spatial effects, but a certain perception of depth will emerge nevertheless.
The delay time can be spread for both channels with a Stereo parameter.
The local delay feedback bus consists of two filters, the first of which is an allpass filter with a tunable frequency, affecting the phases of the signals frequency components.
The second filter is a one-pole lowpass filter with tunable frequency, damping the feedback signal.
The feedback level can be determined by an amount parameter and as this is a stereo effect, cross feedback can be applied as well, feeding some amount of a signal from one channel to the other (and vice versa).
Modulation sources for the Flanger are provided by a stereo LFO (with adjustable Rate and stereo Phase offset) and a simple (monophonic) envelope signal (immediately jumping to the key velocity and then exponentially approaching zero within a time corresponding to the Rate parameter).
The envelope will start with a key when no keys are priorly pressed (in Sounds, pressed keys are determined for each individually).
A crossfade of the two sources can be applied as modulation for the delay time and for the allpass filter frequency independantly.
Finally, the Flanger signal can be blended into the mix by a bipolar Mix parameter, as the signal polarity can have a strong effect when using the global feedback signal.
User Manual - 05.
2.
9.
Cabinet C15 Documentation / User Manual / The Synthesis Engine / Signal Flow and Components / Cabinet Cabinet The second effect is called Cabinet, providing the possibility to further shape the signal in terms of saturation, overdrive and distortion.
It can be regarded as a basic amp simulator.
A sine shaper (providing Drive, Fold and Asymmetry, as described for the branch Shapers) is the central element of this effect, allowing for the creation of new harmonics to the signal.
Before and after the actual shaping, filtering is applied in order to further manipulate the distortion effect.
The signal passes through a highpass filter with adjustable frequency (cutting low signal components) before being fed into the shaper.
After the shaping, a lowpass filter with adjustable frequency determines the amount of high signal components (boosted by the distortion).
A Tilt parameter has a further influence on the signal spectrum before and after the shaping, as it can emphasize either low or high signal components that will be affected by the shaper.
The shaped signal can be amplified by a separate Cab Level parameter, before being crossfaded with the input signal by the Mix parameter.
User Manual - 05.
3.
Dual Mode Signal Flow C15 Documentation / User Manual / Synthesis Engine / Dual Mode Signal Flow Dual Mode Signal Flow Recap: Parameter Organization As explained in Parameter Organization, the C15 Synthesis Engine is divided into distinct that operate differently according to the current Type: Section Global parameters are present once within a Preset of any Type and form the global section, including Sources and their corresponding Amounts, Controls and their corresponding Times as well as the Group (containing Volume, Tune and Scale parameters).
Sections Voicegroup(poly) Parameters bound to polyphonic components (Envelopes A/B/C, Oscillators A/B, Shapers A/B, Comb and State Variable Filters, Feedback and Output Mixers) are present once for Sounds and twice for or Sounds and form one (single) or two (dual) Voicegroups.
In the Feedback Mixer, there are special parameters facilitating polyphonic cross feedback between both (A-B, A-B From I/II, Comb From I/II, SVF From I/II) that are only available in Sounds.
Effects(mono) Parameters bound to monophonic components (Flanger, Cabinet, Gap Filter, Echo, Reverb) also are present once for Sounds and twice for or Sounds and form one (single) or two (dual) effect chains.
Part In or Sounds, each Voicegroup and corresponding effect chain is bound to a Part component with additional Volume and Tune parameters.
Dual Sounds - Main Signal Flow The shown chart can be described as follows: The Output Mixer's main stereo signal of a particular Voicegroup is passed to the FX distributor, sending the signal to both Effect sections with different levels (similar to stereo panning of a mono signal).
The Reverb's stereo output signal of a particular effect chain is then passed to the Part component, where the Part Volume is applied.
Both Parts will then be added and passed to the global Master Volume for final gain control.
Layer Sounds - Detailed Signal Flow With Sounds, the emerging additional details of the shown chart can be described as follows: The Feedback Mixer of a particular Voicegroup can apply polyphonic self/cross feedback (cross: from the other Voicegroup), allowing signals from the Oscillators A/B as well as the Comb and State Variable Filters to be sent inbetween.
The output of a particular effect chain provides an additional dry and wet signal (being downmixes of the stereo Reverb input and output signals).
These signals are then sent back to each Voicegroup's Feedback Mixer for applying monophonic self/cross feedback.
User Manual - 05.
4.
Using Hardware Sources C15 Documentation / User Manual / Synthesis Engine / Using Hardware Sources Using Hardware Sources General Aspects The eight Sources of the C15 can be seen as special controllers, which are designed for live performance.
While playing a certain sound, the Hardware Sources can be used for modulations, changing the sound character.
Four different types of Hardware Sources are provided, each type having its individual aspects (four , two , one , one ).
As for the (external) pedals, their aspects strongly depend on the type of pedal that is used.
The following section contemplates all relevant aspects of Hardware Sources and external controllers in general.
21-26 MIDI The eight Hardware Sources are capable of receiving and sending MIDI messages, allowing for external control.
For more information, please refer to chapter MIDI.
Continuity Controllers can essentially behave in two different manners.
There are switches (like a Sustain Pedal) and there are continuous controllers (like a Volume Pedal).
Although continuous behavior may be preferred in most use cases and can be seen as a general recommendation, switches can also be used when integrating external pedals (providing only two states: on and off).
All four integrated Hardware Sources are continuous.
Directionality and Polarity Controllers with a switch behavior can behave in two different manners as well.
There are opener switches (like a Sustain Pedal) and there are closer switches (like a Mute Pedal or Damping Pedal).
The difference between these two types is the direction they are taking: opener switches go from minimum to maximum, closer switches operate in a reversed manner.
Commonly (but misleadingly) this is referred to as Pedal Polarity.
However, regardless of the direction of a controller, it can be integrated and directions can be manipulated by modulation amounts.
Continuous controllers, on the other hand, can be unipolar (the usual case, providing one direction of possible movement: up or down) or bipolar (like a Pitch Bender, providing two directions of movement: up and down).
Return Behavior Some controllers (like a Sustain Pedal or a Pitch Bender) return to a certain position after using them (usually, the position would be zero or the center), whereas other controllers may remain at their position after releasing them.
Controllers that are returning to their center position usually are bipolar (and the center position equals zero in this case).
The return behavior affects the type of modulation amount of the corresponding Hardware Source, which can be either continuous (for a returning Hardware Source) or switch-like (for non-returning Hardware Sources, providing only on and off).
Direct and Additive Behavior For the Pedals and Ribbons, the user can set the Behavior of the Hardware Source (Non-Return, Return to Center, Return to Zero).
The non-returning and returning modes differ primarily in what is called and Behavior.
Direct Behavior Additive Behavior In non-returning mode the value of the Source is transferred directly to the assigned Control.
This is especially important if two or more non returning Hardware Sources are assigned to one Marco Control.
The value then corresponds absolutely to the value of the last moved Hardware Source.
In the case of non-returning Ribbons, they can only affect one Macro Control exclusively and will be linked to it, which means that both Ribbon and Macro Control essentially act as one parameter (changes to either element are reflected in both).
In contrast, returning Hardware Sources possess Behavior and do not set the Macro Control absolutely to their respective value, but instead add their value to the Macro Control value.
A weighting factor (Amount) can be set here, which determines to which percentage the value of the Hardware Source is transferred to the Macro Control.
With this additive behavior several returning Hardware Sources can be combined in such a way that they do not interfere with each other in simultaneous use, instead all movements are combined.
For interesting pitch modulations, and can be combined in this way, for example.
Changing the Return Behavior When switching a Source from non-returning to returning behavior, keep in mind that the position of the Hardware Source no longer necessarily corresponds to the position of the assigned Macro Control.
This is especially important for the .
While the Ribbons in the non-returning mode are bidirectionally connected to the assigned Macro Control and thus always show the actual Macro Control position, this is no longer the case in the returning mode.
Here the Ribbon shows the value that is transferred to the Macro Control additively.
If the returning Ribbon is in the center position, this does not necessarily mean that the assigned Macro Control is also set to its center as you would expect in non returning mode.
The position and therefore the center/zero position of the Macro Control depends on any other Hardware Sources connected to the Macro Control or any setting made via the or User Interface.
22-16 Integration and Recall Behavior In earlier versions, different Hardware Sources behaved differently when recalling a new Preset.
When recalling while using Hardware Sources, a well-defined behavior was not guaranteed, so we recommended leaving the Hardware Sources untouched when loading a new Preset.
In addition, only the two integrated Ribbons were able to successfully load their states in a Preset recall, if in Non-Return mode.
Returning Hardware Sources did lead to unwanted effects, if differing from their return position when loading a Preset.
On the other hand, the (external) pedals could (and still can) not be affected by loading new Presets.
So, they could be at an unexpected position and produce a jumping behavior when used.
The recall behavior of Hardware Sources has been reworked, fixing long-known problems and better integrating the MIDI functionality.
The Return Behavior of a particular Hardware Source still is part of a Preset and may change when loading a Preset.
However, the positions of Hardware Sources are no longer part of a Preset, they instead remain in their arbitrary positions when Presets are loaded (1.).
Even when a Return Behavior changed, the Hardware Source position will persist (1.).
except for non-returning Ribbons Returning Hardware Sources When the Preset is loaded, the position of a returning Hardware Source will be reflected on associated Macro Controls.
When the returning Source stays untouched in its return position (the usual case), every load of the same Preset will look and sound identical.
When the returning Source is in an arbitrary position, loading the same Preset will look and sound different, depending on the current position.
Non-Returning Pedals When the Preset is loaded, the position of a non-returning Pedal will be ignored by associated Macro Controls.
Loading the same Preset will look and sound the same.
The Pedal and Macro are likely to differ in their positions.
With the next movement of the Pedal, the Macro will jump to the next position and both Pedal and Macro positions are synchronized again.
Non-Returning Ribbons When the Preset is loaded, the position of a non-returning Ribbon will be overwritten by the associated Macro Control (if present).
Loading the same Preset will look and sound the same.
Both Ribbon and Macro positions remain synchronized throughout.
Additional Settings There are more settings provided for each Hardware Source in the Setup menu, depending on the type of source.
The Bender and Aftertouch provide a curve, weighting the movements, whereas the Ribbons provide a Relative Factor, amplifying movements on the Ribbons when using relative mode.
Operation Modes Except for the Ribbons, all Hardware Sources operate in absolute mode.
Ribbons on the other hand, can operate in both absolute and relative mode (the relative mode can amplify drag gestures on the Ribbon).
Functionality Overview All the mentioned different aspects of Hardware Sources are shown in the following table: Source Pedal 1 ...
4 Bender Aftertouch Ribon 1, 2 Continuity continuous/switch continous Polarity unipolar/bipolar bipolar unipolar unipolar/bipolar Return Behavior non/zero/center center zero non/center Integration external integrated 22-16 Recall Behavior returning Sources The Preset will load reflecting the returning HW Source in its current (arbitrary) position, so the resulting state and sound depends on where the Source currently is.
non-returning Pedals The Preset will load ignoring the non-returning Pedals.
In most cases, associated Macro Controls will differ in their position.
Once the Pedal is moved, the Macro Control will jump to the next Pedal position and both positions will be synchronized again.
non-returning Ribbons The Preset will load overwriting the non-returning Ribbons, if they are associated to a Macro Control.
<!-- no n/a yes --> Settings Pedal Preset (Pin Assignment) Curve Relative Factor Operation Mode absolute absolute/relative Pedal Integration For now, the safe and recommended method of integrating external pedals is to turn the device off beforehand.
After all pedals are plugged in the provided sockets, the C15 can be switched on again.
The booting process will recognize the pedals' circuit architectures and integrate them accordingly.
There is a Setup menu provided as well, in which the pin assignment of each pedal can be set manually.
However, this menu should only be used if the pin assignment of a pedal is known, as wrong assignments can easily lead to overheating, possibly causing permanent damage on the device.
Besides, the menu is still in development and proper functionality is not guaranteed for now.
Modulation Aspects As already mentioned, the modulation amount of a certain Hardware Source on a Macro Control depends on the sources Return Behavior (only returning sources allow for a continuous amount).
Furthermore, when a non-returning Ribbon is assigned to a Macro Control, the assignment will be bidirectional.
In other words, the Ribbon will move the Macro Control and vice versa.
For a better understanding, have a look at this interactive diagram.
Considering the Hardware Sources, their current settings and the modulation amounts on Macro Controls alltogether, they can be referred to as a Modulation Template.
All included settings will be stored and recalled with presets, but for different use cases (like different pedals on another device), the template may not work properly.
We plan to further investigate on template functionalities (like import and export functions) and may offer solutions in the near future.
For the sound design (and included factory presets) so far, the following template appeared to be meaningful, and it can be found in most of the presets: The template defines two non-returning, continuous Pedals (1 and 2) for Macro Controls A and B, which are used to modulate different sound aspects like phase modulation intensities, filter frequencies, resonances or effect amounts, for example.
Similarly, the two Ribbons are mapped on the two Macro Controls as well.
In addition, Macro Control C is assigned to the Bender and primarily used for bending pitches.
The remaining Macro Control D is assigned to a returning, continuous Pedal (4), which serves as a Sustain or Damper Pedal (depending on the sound).
User Manual - 06.
Recorder C15 Documentation / User Manual / Recorder Recorder General Function The internal recorder enables you to capture the C15's output signal with the best possible audio quality at any time, without connecting a sound card.
The stereo signal behind the Soft Clipper and before the D/A converter is written to the RAM, using the lossless compression of the FLAC format (24 bits, 48 kHz).
A maximum of 500 MB can be stored in the RAM.
Because of the FLAC compression this is enough for hours of permanent playing and for days of recording when there are pauses in the playing.
If the recorded amount of data exceeds the limit of 500 MB, the oldest data will be overwritten.
Therefore it works like a ring buffer that always contains the latest recording.
The content of the RAM will be lost, when you switch off the C15.
You can select a segment of the recorded audio and download it to your computer to use it in your production environment.
The recorded audio can be downloaded in both the FLAC and WAV format.
Recorder Settings - Auto-Start In the Setup you find a new page for Recorder settings.
With the option Auto-Start Recorder the user can decide if the audio recording starts automatically when the C15 is switched on, or if the user has to start it by the Record button.
User Interface The Recorder tab can be opened by the Open Recorder entry in the View menu.
The tab has the address: http://192.
168.
8.
2/recorder/index.
html The recorder works independent from its browser tab being open or not.
Zoom and Scroll At the bottom of the recorder display you find a dark stripe representing the whole length of the audio recording that is in the memory.
It is the frame for a bar that is used for scrolling and zooming.
By holding the bar in its grey center area and dragging it, you shift the visible section of the recorded audio, which means that the display content is scrolled.
By the two handles at the ends of the bar you can change its length and therefore the zoom factor.
The two buttons with magnifier + and - icons and the mouse wheel respectively the + and - buttons of your computer keyboard can also be used to zoom in and out.
Control Buttons Restore - Play/Pause - Record - Download - Delete Computer Keyboard Shortcuts Command Shortcut Play / Pause space bar Record R Restore Z Download S Zoom In / Out + / - Scroll left / right arrow keys To Previous/Net Preset Marker up / down arrow keys (coming soon) Playing Back Recorded Audio The C15 can play back the recorded audio through its outputs.
The playback start position is set by a click/touch in the darker outer lanes of the recorder display.
A green line - the Play cursor - shows the position.
A time label is attached.
When the Play button is pressed, the Play cursor starts to move and the recorded audio is played back.
The button gets a Pause symbol and can be used to interrupt and continue the playback.
Alternatively you can press the space bar for toggling between Play and Pause.
You can play the C15 live while the playback is running, but please be aware that the sum of the two signals can cause clipping distortion.
Restoring a Sound The Undo system of the C15 memorizes every user action on parameters or presets.
It allows to go back to the state of the synth engine at any point in time since the start of the session.
Therefore it is possible to restore the sound at a certain position on the timeline of the Recorder and to use the same state of the synth engine as it was at the time of recording.
For this you move the Play cursor to the point in time of which you want to restore the sound and press the Restore button or the Z key on your keyboard.
The Undo System will go back to the state of the parameters at the selected point in time, takes a snapshot of them and copies it into the editbuffer.
Preset Labels Please note that the selection and load status of a preset cannot be restored because the preset might have been changed, moved or deleted.
In order to not loose the information which presets were used, the Recorder creates a label when a preset is loaded.
The left end of the label is aligned to the loading time.
The label contains the number and name of the bank and the preset.
This might have changed in the meantime, but often it can still be found under the same name at the same place.
To be on the safe side we recommend to create copies of the banks that contain important presets by using the Export command.
Selecting a Segment for Download By click/touch and drag in the inner lane you can select a time segment.
The start and end points can be shifted by the two light-blue handles.
Two labels are showing the times at the start and end points.
The selected part can be downloaded by pressing the Download button or S on the computer keyboard.
A dialog opens in which you can change the file name and choose between FLAC and WAV format (24 bit, 48 kHz).
If the browser is set to ask for the destination for the downloaded file, it will open the referring dialog now.
Otherwise it will store the file in the standard download folder.
The selection can be disabled by a single click/touch in the inner lane.
Starting and Stopping the Recording If the Auto-Start Recorder option in the Recorder Settings is On the Record button will be shown as active from the beginning.
You can use it to stop the recording.
This might be desired to save memory or to focus on reviewing the recorded material.
When you press the button again the recording will be continued.
If the Auto-Start Recorder option is Off, the Record button needs to be pressed to start recording.
The keyboard shortcut for starting or stopping the recording is R.
Deleting the Recorded Audio When you press the Delete button the audio memory will be cleared and as a result the timeline will be empty.
User Manual - 07.
MIDI C15 Documentation / User Manual / MIDI The MIDI Implementation of the C15 Since the Studio Package update the C15 can receive and send MIDI messages.
Received MIDI messages can control the C15 and affect the sound, similar to playing the instrument itself.
When playing on the C15, MIDI messages can be sent, reflecting the performance.
Note that received MIDI messages will never be sent, so there is no MIDI Thru or loopback functionality.
Receive and Send options include a Channel (Omni, 1 ...
16) specifier, filtering events accordingly.
When a Split Sound is loaded, a secondary (Split) Channel can be used in order to separate both Parts from each other.
As classical MIDI operates on 7 bit resolution (128 steps), there is a loss in accuracy (the C15 operates on much higher precision).
Nevertheless, precision can be maintained by enabling High Res.
options.
When enabled, the resolution increases to 14 bit (16384 steps).
Values are then encoded as a pair of MSB (coarse) and LSB (fine) components, effectively doubling the amount of messages.
This is still compatible with the classical resolution, as the LSB component is optional when receiving MIDI messages.
User Manual - 07.
1.
MIDI Events C15 Documentation / User Manual / MIDI / MIDI Events MIDI Events The C15 can send and receive MIDI messages for the following events: Note On and Note Off When enabled, the C15 will produce sounds when receiving MIDI Note messages.
Likewise, the C15 will send MIDI Note messages when playing on the internal keybed, if enabled.
Note On and Off velocities are supported and can optionally operate on high resolution, using an additional MIDI CC (Control Change) message on Control Number 88, encoding the LSB component.
When a Split Sound is loaded, Notes can be received and sent on both Parts, using the secondary (Split) Channel setting.
The eight Hardware Sources Physical control elements of the C15 like a pedal or the bender are called Hardware Sources.
They can be flexibly mapped to the Macro Controls, each of which can modulate up to 90 assignable parameters.
In the C15's user interface the Hardware Sources are represented by eight sliders.
Their positions can be sent and received via MIDI in the following way: Pedal 1/2/3/4 can be assigned to MIDI CCs 01...31 for the MSB while CC 33...63 can work as LSB for 14 bit resolution.
CC 64...69 can be assigned in a 2-state switching mode.
Ribbon 1/2 can be assigned to MIDI CC 01...31 for the MSB while CC 33...63 can work as LSB for 14 bit resolution.
The Bender can be assigned to MIDI Pitchbend or to MIDI CC 01...31 for the MSB while CC 33...63 can work as LSB for 14 bit resolution.
Aftertouch can be assigned to MIDI Channel Pressure or to MIDI CC 01...31 for the MSB while CC 33...63 can work as LSB for 14 bit resolution, or to one half of the range of MIDI Pitchbend (up or down).
Note that assignments are non-exclusive, so multiple Hardware Sources can be bound to the same received MIDI message, as well as being merged into indistinguishable MIDI messages when sent.
This may be useful in certain scenarios, so there are no restrictions.
However, it is up to the user to find a meaningful setting, apart from the provided default setting, consisting of distinct assignments.
Preset Selection One of the Preset Banks can be assigned to receive and send MIDI Program Changes.
The Program Change numbers are mapped to the first 128 presets of this Bank.
User Manual - 07.
2.
Connecting the C15 to a USB Device C15 Documentation / User Manual / MIDI / Connecting the C15 to a USB Device Connecting the C15 to a USB Device The C15 has a Type A connector for USB, and its embedded computer system works as a USB host for USB devices connected to this port.
This means that you only need a standard USB cable to set up a MIDI communication with an instrument, a hardware sequencer, or a MIDI interface that has a USB Type B connector.
You can connect the C15 to multiple USB MIDI devices via a USB hub.
Important: The USB port of the C15 can only supply a limited current to bus-powered devices.
Devices that have a higher power consumption need to be run with their own power supply, or through a powered hub.
Connecting the C15 via 5-pole DIN Connectors To use the classical MIDI cables and 5-pin DIN Ins and Outs a MIDI interface can be connected as an USB device directly to the USB port of the C15.
The most convenient and cost effective solution are cables with integrated USB-MIDI interface.
Connecting the C15 to a Computer A computer running a DAW or similar is the center of many setups.
It functions as a USB host and can only be connected to USB devices.
Since the C15 is also a USB host we provide the MIDI Bridge that functions as a double-sided USB device with two Type B connectors.
One of the ports is connected to the C15 and the second to your computer.
Our adapter will appear as NLL-MIDI-Bridge in the list of USB MIDI devices.
The two LEDs on top of the box show the operation of the two USB Ports.
If both are lit in green color the box is working normal.
If one of the LEDs ist not green, the connection to its side is interrupted.
More information about the operation of the MIDI Bridge can be found in the 

=== MIDI Bridge Manual ===

.
Besides its function for the C15 the MIDI bridge can also be used for the MIDI connection between other USB hosts, like two computers.
User Manual - 07.
3.
MIDI Settings C15 Documentation / User Manual / MIDI / MIDI Settings MIDI Settings In the Setup (both in the and UI) you find a new page for MIDI Settings.
It is divided into the sections Channels, Assignments and Routings.
Furthermore, you find direct access to Panic, Local Enable and Program Change Bank at the very top of the settings page.
Panic When triggered, the C15's Voice Allocation, Envelopes and Buffer will be reset and an All Notes Off MIDI message will be send on the respective channel(s).
As a result, all internal audio and external gear will stop playing.
A common method to face stuck MIDI notes, but it also can be helpful, when you lost control of the sound, e.
g.
through a feedback loop.
Panic can also be triggered by pressing all four soft buttons on the base unit at the same time.
Local Enable When set to Off, both the C15's keyboard and the eight Hardware Sources are disconnected from the synth engine but still can be used to send MIDI note and Control Change, Pitchbend or Channel Pressure messages.
In this mode the base unit display is not showing the associated Macro Control, but the MIDI-CC number assigned to the Ribbons instead.
Please note that changing this setting while a note is active resets the voice allocation, the envelopes and the buffer of the C15, so that the audio playback is interrupted for a brief moment.
In this case, a MIDI All Notes Off message is also sent on the respective channel(s).
Next to this shorthand option, Local Enable modes are individually available for Notes and all eight Hardware Sources, see below (7.
3.
3 MIDI Settings: Routings).
Program Change Bank Here you can assign the Preset Bank that is used for sending and receiving MIDI Program Change messages.
By selecting None, no MIDI Program Change messages will be received or sent.
Please see the next subchapter Choosing a Bank for MIDI Program Change for choosing a Preset Bank directly from the preset view.
Please note, that every time you change the Program Change Bank, a corresponding MIDI message is sent.
Choosing a Bank for MIDI Program Change To make use of MIDI Program Change messages one of the C15's preset banks has to be assigned as the source and target of Program Changes.
A received Program Change would select the preset with the referring number in this bank and the selection of a new preset in the bank will send a MIDI Program Change with its number.
Selecting a preset that has a higher number than 128 will not send a Program Change.
The Direct Load switch decides if the C15 only sends a MIDI Program Change when you select a preset, or if the preset is also loaded into the sound engine.
Therefore it has a similar effect like a Local Off for Program Changes.
The header of the MIDI-assigned bank is marked by a symbol that looks like a 5-pole MIDI connector.
The bank can be connected or disconnected in the following ways: In the graphical UI you find the entry Connect Bank to MIDI PC or Disconnect Bank from MIDI PC in the context menu of the bank header.
In the Preset Screen of the Hardware UI activate the Bank focus by pressing the 1 (with a dual preset hold the button for a second).
In the Edit menu you find the entry MIDI PC: On or MIDI PC: Off, that can be toggled by the Button.
By connecting a bank to MIDI PC the previously connected bank will be disconnected.
After disconnecting the currently connected bank, none of the banks will be connected.
The currently assigned bank can also be found and changed in the Program Change Bank menu in the MIDI Settings.
MIDI Settings: Channels Here you can select the MIDI channel that is used to send and receive MIDI messages for both Primary and Split Channel.
The Split Channel is relevant only if a Split Sound is loaded.
If you select Omni, messages from all 16 MIDI channels will be applied.
None will block all incoming and/or outgoing MIDI messages.
When Split Channel is set to Common, it will use the same MIDI channel as the Primary Channel.
Settings for Split Channels apply to Split Sounds only.
It controls the MIDI channel for MIDI messages sent and/or received by Part II.
If the Split Channel is not set to Common, the Split Point(s) are not applied to the received MIDI notes and both Parts can be played over the full MIDI note range.
Please note that changing this setting while a note is active resets the voice allocation, the envelopes and the buffer of the C15, so that the audio playback is interrupted for a brief moment.
In this case, a MIDI All Notes Off message is also sent on the respective channel(s).
MIDI Settings: Assignments These settings determine which types and numbers of MIDI messages are assigned to the Hardware Sources.
High Resolution options for Velocities and Hardware Sources as well as a Bank selector for Program Changes are also provided.
The Assignments apply to both MIDI Send and MIDI Receive.
Pedal 1, 2, 3, 4 Each pedal can be assigned to a MIDI Control Change.
The CC numbers 1 to 31 are available for continuous operation in 7-bit and 14-bit (High-Res.) mode.
In 14-bit mode a second CC with a number between 33 and 63 is automatically assigned for the LSB.
In addition, the CC numbers 64 to 69 are available.
They work as 2-state switches, as it is typical for e.
g.
a MIDI sustain pedal.
When the C15's pedal position rises above 50 %, a MIDI CC value of 127 is sent, when it falls below 50% a value of 0 is sent.
A received MIDI CC value smaller than 64 sets the pedal position to 0 %.
Values of 64 or larger set the pedal position to 100 %.
By selecting None the pedal is disconnected from MIDI.
Ribbon 1, 2 Each ribbon can be assigned to a MIDI Control Change.
The CC numbers 1 to 31 are available in 7-bit and 14-bit (High-Res) mode.
In 14-bit mode a second CC with a number between 33 and 63 is automatically assigned for the LSB.
By selecting None the ribbon is disconnected from MIDI.
Bender In the typical application as a pitch bender the Bender can be assigned to MIDI Pitchbend.
This has 14 bits resolution by definition.
The Bender can also be assigned to a MIDI Control Change.
The CC numbers 1 to 31 are available in 7-bit and 14-bit (High-Res) mode.
In 14-bit mode a second CC with a number between 33 and 63 is automatically assigned for the LSB.
By selecting None the Bender is disconnected from MIDI.
Aftertouch The most common assignment would be MIDI Channel Pressure.
This has only 7 bits of resolution.
Aftertouch can also be assigned to a MIDI Control Change.
The CC numbers 1 to 31 are available in 7-bit and 14-bit (High-Res) mode.
In 14-bit mode a second CC with a number between 33 and 63 is automatically assigned for the LSB Two additional options are available to assign Aftertouch to one half of the MIDI Pitchbend.
Pitchbend up has a range from the center to the maximum while Pitchbend down goes from the center to the minimum.
These ranges have 13 bits of resolution.
By selecting None, Aftertouch is disconnected from MIDI.
High-Res.
CCs (use LSB) Control Changes can be transmitted with a resolution of 14 bit by using two CCs, one for coarse (MSB) values and one for fine (LSB) values.
The LSB message has to be sent before the MSB message.
The number of the CC for the LSB is derived from the number of the CC for the MSB by adding 32.
To avoid conflicts with other applications of the LSB CCs, their use can be disabled (q Off).
This setting applies to all assigned MIDI Control Changes.
High-Res.
Velocity (CC 88) Note On and Note Off velocities can be transmitted with a resolution of 14 bit by sending a CC 88 message before each Note On or Note Off message.
The value of the CC 88 represents the LSB that is providing additional 7 bits of resolution.
To avoid conflicts with other applications of CC 88, its use as velocity LSB can be disabled (Off).
Default Mappings Classic MIDI High Resolution 1 CC20 CC20 + CC52 (MSB + LSB) 2 CC21 CC21 + CC53 (MSB + LSB) 3 CC22 CC22 + CC54 (MSB + LSB) 4 CC23 CC23 + CC55 (MSB + LSB) 1 CC24 CC24 + CC56 (MSB + LSB) 2 CC25 CC25 + CC57 (MSB + LSB) Pitchbend Pitchbend Channel Pressure CC26 + CC58 (MSB + LSB) Velocity Off On (LSB CC88) CCs Off (MSB only) On (MSB + LSB) MIDI Settings: Routings These settings allow to set individual and specific MIDI routings.
The matrix consists of five columns: Send Primary (SP), Receive Primary (RP), Send Split (SS), Receive Split (RS) and Local (L).
The rows list Notes, Program Change and the eight Sources (Pedal 1-4, Bender, Aftertouch and Ribbon 1-2.
In the Web UI, a check mark at the respective matrix position sets the entry to On, removing the check mark sets it to Off.
On the hardware, a highlighted entry represents On, a dark one Off.
Also, the access to the matrix is different on the hardware.
When you choose one of the rows and press , you reach a dedicated settings dialog for this row.
In the center, the display shows you the name of the respective component, e.
g.
Notes.
Use 2 and 3 to change between the rows.
With 4, you can switch between the columns.
The name of the actual column is also displayed below the chosen row, e.
g.
Send Primary.
By turning the dial, you can set the entry to On or Off.
When holding the Button while turning the dial, you can set the whole row to On or Off.
The status is also displayed by the check marks on the right side.
By pressing 1, you get back to the matrix overview.
Send (Primary/Split) When set to Off the respective C15 component will not send MIDI messages on the respective channel.
Receive (Primary/Split) When set to Off the respective C15 component will not receive MIDI messages on the respective channel.
Local When set to Off the respective component is disconnected from the synth engine, but still can be used to send MIDI note and Control Change, Pitchbend or Channel Pressure messages.
In this mode the base unit display is not showing the associated Macro Control, but the MIDI-CC number assigned to the Ribbons instead.
Decoupling a Hardware Source from the synth by setting Local Enable to Off, changes their representation in the UI.
The Hardware Source is now shown differentiated into Send and Receive.
Send shows the physical status of the respective Hardware Source, for example the current position of a Ribbon and relates to all communication with external devices.
This value is sent via MIDI.
Receive assigns the value that is passed internally to the synth.
This is either a value received via MIDI or, in the case of the bidirectional Ribbons, a value received via an adjusted Macro Control.
This allows the audio engine of the C15 to be triggered by an external device and at the same time the Hardware Sources can be used to control other external devices without conflict.
Set all Routings to On/Off Below the Routings Matrix, you find the options to enable or disable all routings by pressing Set all Routings to On or Set all Routings to Off (respectively All On/All Off in the UI).
Please note that changing the routings setting while a note is active resets the voice allocation and the envelopes of the C15, so that the audio playback is interrupted for a brief moment.
In this case, a MIDI All Notes Off message is also sent on the respective channel(s).
User Manual - 07.
4.
Practical Studio Examples C15 Documentation / User Manual / MIDI / Practical Studio Examples Practical Studio Examples With the C15's MIDI features, it can be used as a master keyboard and production tool in the center of your studio or live performance set.
In the following we want to show you exemplary scenarios, which will help you to understand the MIDI settings better and give you some orientation and helpful tips when using the C15 as a production tool.
Scenario 1: Studio Setup A Digital Audio Workstation (DAW) is the heart of almost every modern music studio.
Therefore, this first scenario will focus on using your C15 with the benefits of a DAW, but also as a controller for other instruments within the DAW.
So, on the one hand, we will use the C15 as a sound generator, and on the other hand, to control a Plug-In.
Please note that this setup is not entirely applicable to a live situation as any change to the MIDI settings while a note is active can lead to a reset of C15's envelopes and voice allocation and an All Notes Off MIDI message.
As a consequence internal and external audio will stop for a brief moment.
First, we want to record a MIDI track, that triggers a C15 bass sound.
This MIDI track receives MIDI notes and CC values by the C15.
As we send MIDI data to the DAW and back to the C15, we can benefit from the MIDI processing features of the DAW (arpeggiator, chord generator, etc.).
For the bass track, we want to record MIDI-Notes and the ribbon's CC values.
For this purpose, we have to change some of the routing settings: turn on Send and Receive for both Notes and Ribbon 1 & 2 for Primary Channel.
As we don't want MIDI Echo issues to appear, we turn off Local for them.
The direct connection between the keys and both ribbons and the C15 is now interrupted and completely controlled via MIDI.
MIDI-Monitoring of your DAW should be activated.
You can now record the track.
The track C15 Bass of the DAW now controls the C15 and the ribbon's LEDs reflect the incoming CC values.
You can now use the keys and the remaining Hardware Sources to control a Plug-In in the DAW.
In this example we use Arturia's Mini V3.
Therefore, we want to turn off track 1's MIDI monitoring and choose track 2 for recording.
The C15 keeps on playing, run by the recorded Bass track.
As the C15 is still hearable, we do have to make some adaptions to the Routings settings.
We want to turn off Local and Receive for all other Hardware Sources as they would interfere with the playing bass sound otherwise.
You can now turn on Local for the Ribbons again, as this allows you a direct impact on the bass sound.
Further, turn on Send for Pedals 1-4, Bender as well as Aftertouch and Notes, as we want to use these to control the Plug-In.
We can now control the Plug-In without changing the bass sound unintentionally.
Scenario 2: Controlling two Plug-Ins at the same time Thanks to C15's Split Mode, we can use MIDI to control and play two Plug-Ins at the same time.
For this scenario, we need to load an existing Split-Preset or create a new one, as only then MIDI data is sent and received on the Split Channel as well.
Next, we have to set the Send and Receive channels according to our settings in the DAW.
In this case, we have two Plug-In tracks set to MIDI Channel 1 and 2.
Therefore, we set Primary Channel to 1 and Split Channel to 2 for both Send and Receive.
We can now control Plug-In 1 with the left and Plug-In 2 with the right Split Part.
In the Routing settings, you can distribute the Hardware Sources on the channels or use them on both simultaneously - there are reasonable scenarios for both use cases.
As you wish, you can turn off Local, so you don't hear the C15 and the MIDI-CCs will pop up on the small base unit display.
As this setup is just about sending MIDI, all Receive entries were deactivated for the sake of clarity.
User Manual - 08.
Setup (C15 System Settings) C15 Documentation / User Manual / Setup (C15 System Settings) Setup (C15 System Settings) The C15 also features a few global settings that are preset-independent.
They are organized in the Menu and mainly define the interaction with peripherals (such as sensitivities for velocities, external pedal integration, MIDI, or connected devices via Wi-Fi).
Besides, the Setup menu allows for installing updates and transferring backups.
Chapter Setup Navigation provides all information on accessing and navigating the Setup menu both on the Unit and on the User Interface.
The following passages explain all provided menu items.
Device Settings Velocity Curve The Velocity Curve determines the sensitivity of the instrument for key velocities.
A soft setting increases the sensitivity for low velocities, a hard setting increases the sensitivity for high velocites.
With the normal setting, the sensitivity remains equal for all velocites.
Aftertouch Curve The Aftertouch Curve determines the sensitivity of the instrument for Aftertouch gestures.
A soft setting increases the sensitivity for low aftertouch intensities, a hard setting increases the sensitivity for high aftertouch intensities.
With the normal setting, the sensitivity remains equal throughout.
Bender Curve The Bender Curve determines the sensitivity of the instrument for Bender gestures.
A soft setting increases the sensitivity for low bending intensities, a hard setting increases the sensitivity for high bending intensities.
With the normal setting, the sensitivity remains equal throughout.
Pedal Settings As described in chapter Using Hardware Sources the integration of pedals can be done manually.
External Pedals can be connected to the C15 while the device is running.
In the Settings menu, the pedals Assignment can be selected.
Those may vary depending on the pedal vendor (Roland uses Pot Tip Active, Yamaha uses Pot Ring Active, for example).
If uncertain, which setting should apply to your external pedal, try the different options until the pedal works as intended.
When an external pedal has been connected, it needs to be calibrated.
This can be achieved by slowly turning the pedal to its minimal state and after remaining there for around a second, slowly turning the pedal to its maximal state and remaining there for around a second.
The calibration will be stored by the C15, so the calibration is only necessary once after a pedal has been plugged in, even after restarts of the device.
Preset Glitch Suppression This option can be enabled in order to avoid drastical changing pitches and other emerging artifacts, being provoked by a preset change.
The suppression will be realized by clearing (flushing) all delay buffers when a new preset is loaded.
Note that this feature is not fully implemented yet, as the suppression is not perfect in every case and can still produce small artifacts, depending on the preset change's circumstances.
But in general, the effect is quite noticeable.
Sync Parts across User Interfaces For and Sounds, different Parts can be shown on the C15s Display and on one or multiple instances of the User Interface.
This can be useful but in many cases it was confusing.
Therefore the normal behaviour is that the Part selection is applied once to all UIs, corresponding to Sync Parts across UIs being on.
When the option is set off the Parts can be selected separately.
Edit Smoothing Time When editing a parameter, the new adjusted value will be approached within the Edit Smoothing Time, which can range between zero and 200 ms.
Higher times will lead to a slower response of the sound engine.
This time does not affect preset recalls or modulations (having their own, individual times).
Transition Time The transition time will be effective when recalling presets, defining the smoothing time of the parameters as they approach their new values.
Tune Reference The tuning of the C15 can be adjusted in order to fit with acoustic instruments, spanning from 400.
0 Hz up to 480.
0 Hz (default: 440.
0 Hz).
When using default parameter values(1), pressing the A3 key will produce a tone with the exact frequency provided by this setting.
1) required default parameter values for: Transposition (no Note Shift), Pitch (at 60.
00 st, incl.
Key Tracking of 100.
0 % and Env C at 0.
0 st), Scaling (Offset for A at 0.
0 ct).
Init Sound As described in chapter Editing a Parameter (and Manipulating Sounds), specific parameters (and whole Sounds) can be set to their default values.
The current Sound can be used for overwriting these default values by pressing Store.
In order to restore the Factory default values, press Reset.
GUI Settings A complete reference to the settings of the User Interface can be found in chapter GUI Settings.
Hardware UI Encoder Acceleration The in the Panel can detect acceleration gestures and apply them to an item in focus accordingly.
With sufficient acceleration, even high resolution parameters can be completely traversed with only one or a few turns of the Encoder.
Ribbon Relative Factor Similarly, drag gestures on the two touchstrips can be amplified by the Ribbon Relative Factor.
This option is only effective, when a Ribbon is in relative mode.
Signal Flow Indication As described in chapter Overviews the Flow Overview allows for a fast and easy impression on how signals of a preset are routed.
However, blinking LEDs may distract the user in some cases, therefore the Flow Overview is optional.
Screensaver Timeout An optional timeout setting has been added in order to prevent possible pixel deterioration in the two displays, which can occur when the C15 is running for longer periods of time without any interaction.
When the screensaver is running, any interaction will interrupt it and reset the timeout.
MIDI Settings A complete reference to the MIDI settings can be found in chapter MIDI.
Recorder (Settings) With the option Auto-Start Recorder the user can decide if the audio recording starts automatically when the C15 is switched on, or if the user has to start it by the Button (see chapter Recorder for more details).
System Info Device Name The Device Name of the C15 instrument can be chosen by the user.
It will appear in the meta data of presets and determine the SSID of the Wi-Fi network.
In order to complete the renaming process, restart the instrument afterwards.
SSID During the booting process, the SSID will be generated according to the Device Name.
A Wi-Fi network with the SSID should be available after booting.
Besides the Device Name, the SSID contains a static prefix (NL-C15-).
When establishing a Wi-Fi connection, choose the network with the corresponding SSID.
Passphrase The secured Wi-Fi connection has to be confirmed by a passphrase.
This passphrase can be seen and changed in the System Info (effective after rebooting).
The passphrase can be set manually, it can be randomly generated or set to default (88888888).
Website Address When a Wi-Fi connection was established, the User Interface is available with the shown address, which can be typed into your browser's address bar.
Free Disk Space The remaining free disk space is displayed in order to see, if the instrument is capable of holding more presets.
RAM usage For developers, the system's current RAM consumption is indicated.
Software Version (Device Hardware ID, Branch, Head, Commits, Commit Date, RT Version) For developers, the Device Hardware ID and versions of integrated components are displayed as well.
Date/Time The instrument contains its own system clock, which will be included in preset meta data in the form of timestamps.
It can be adjusted as well.
Update Available If a USB stick with a new (not already installed) update file is connected to the C15, this entry will indicate this with Yes.
When restarting the C15, the update will be installed.
Buffer Underruns For developers, the number of detected Audio buffer underruns is indicated, hinting at performance issues.
Upload Software Update If an external device is connected to the C15, a software update file can be directly uploaded.
The C15 will then restart and install the update.
About In the About section, the Nonlinear Labs developer team is listed.
Backup USB Available In order to backup all banks or restore a preexisting backup, a USB stick has to be plugged in.
The USB Available indicator shows if a USB stick is currently present.
Save all Banks When entering the Save all Banks option, a dialog will indicate that this process may take a while (when many banks are present) and ask for confirmation.
After confirming, a backup file will be created on the USB stick.
Restore all Banks When entering the Restore all Banks option, a dialog will indicate that all present banks will be discarded when proceeding.
After confirming, another dialog screen will provide a list of all backup files found on the USB stick.
After selecting the right file, the backup process can be started by confirming.
Details on how to save or restore backups on the User Interface can be found in chapter Backups.
User Manual - 09.
Updating the C15 C15 Documentation / User Manual / Updating the C15 Updating the C15 Before starting an Update Please save your preset banks before installing the update! The most convenient way is to use the menu entry Save all Banks as Backup File...
in the UI or with Backup and Save all Banks...
in the Setup menu in the Display.
For more information, see Backups.
Steps to proceed The latest installer is offered on www.
nonlinear-labs.
de/support/updates/updates.
htmlBy clicking its button you download the file nonlinear-c15-update.
tar to your computer.
Your computer might offer to unpack this type of file.
Please make sure that the file is NOT unpacked or changed in any way.
When using the C15 USB Stick: Copy the file (nonlinear-c15-update.
tar) to the root folder of the USB memory stick that was delivered with the C15.
(Other memory sticks will only work if they have the FAT32 format.) Switch off the C15 and plug the memory stick into the USB connector at the backside of the C15.
Switch on the C15.
The update process will start automatically.
When using the Graphical User Interface: Open the Setup Window in the Graphical User Interface and navigate to the Symstem Info tab.
The file (nonlinear-c15-update.
tar) can be directly uploaded from your computer by clicking on the corresponding button next to the Upload Software Update option.
Once the file was successfully uploaded, the C15 will automatically restart and start the update process.
The update process may take several minutes.
The Display will indicate different phases of the process by showing Updating...
messages.
Do not power off the C15 during the update installation!An interruption of the power in this phase can cause irreversible damage.
When the update is finished, the display will show: Updating C15 DONE! Please restart! Please switch off the instrument, (remove the memory stick) and switch it on again.
Further Notes on Updates If you update from version 21-02 you might get the error message Updating C15 FAILED during the installation.
In this case the installer needs to be run a second time.
Please restart the C15 without removing the USB stick.
Now the update should be successful.
After a successful update the file on the memory stick is automatically renamed to nonlinear-c15- update.
tar-copied.
Please delete this file before using the stick for another update.
All downloaded update files have identical names (nonlinear-c15-update.
tar).
This is the file name required by the C15 to detect an update on the memory stick.
If there is an earlier update file with this name in the download folder of your browser, the name of the new update will be modified (e.
g.
by adding -1).
Therefore please check if the file has been renamed and restore the original name.
It is recommended to remove all C15 update files from the download folder.
If you want to store different updates on your computer, please keep them in separate folders or rename them, so that you can identify them later.
You can check the current software versions in the System Info section of the Menu.
For this press theButton on the Panel or the Setup entry in the Menu of the User Interface and select System Info.
Here you find the Software Version.
It shows the release date as well as year and week in the format YY-WW (e.
g.
20-40 - week 40 in year 2020).
If a FAILED message appears in the display, the update was not successful.
In this case please repeat the installation.
Rename the installer file to the original name nonlinear-c15-update.
tar, plug in the USB stick and start the C15 again.
If this is without success please contact us.
On the USB stick you will find a log file (nonlinear-c15-update.
log.
txt) which you can send us to help us analyzing the problem.
User Manual - 10.
Specifications C15 Documentation / User Manual / Specifications Specifications Synthesis Engine 2 Oscillators (sine wave, adjustable jitter/noise) Phase modulation: Self, A > B, B > A, via the Shapers, and by the feedback signal 2 Shapers (sine curve, adjustable folding and asymmetry) Ring Modulator Comb Filter (tunable, with allpass and lowpass) State Variable Filter (2 - 4 poles, multi-mode, spread cutoffs, FM) Feedback Mixer (4 inputs, shaper for the sum) Feedback bus with 4 destinations Output Mixer (4 inputs, stereo output, shaper for the sum) 3 ADBDSR Envelopes, adjustable Attack Curve Velocity amounts for envelope levels and all times Note-off velocity can be applied to the release times 24-voice polyphony Split and Layer modes for two Parts of 12 voices Unison: 2 - 24 voices, adjustable detune, phase and pan spreading Monophonic mode, adjustable priority, legato modes, and glide time Micro-tuning for the 12 steps of the octave 5 Stereo Effects: Flanger/Chorus/Phaser/Tremolo Cabinet (amp simulation) 8-pol Gap/Band Filter Echo Reverb Parameter resolution: typically 1000 steps (250-15000 steps) 6 Macro Controls, each can be routed to up to 106 target parameters Keys and Controls 61-key Fatar TP/8S keybed with semi-weighted long-arm keys Two 800 mm ribbons (touch strips), each with 33 LEDs Ribbon modes: absolute, relative, combinable with return-to-center Lever (magnetic force loaded) for pitchbending and similar applications Aftertouch (global) Resolution of velocity, ribbons, bender, aftertouch, pedals: 4000 steps Free mapping of pedals, ribbons, bender and aftertouch to the 6 Macro Controls User Interface 96 high-quality buttons for quick access to all parameters Magnetic front panel foils are replaceable to support future synthesis engines The base unit can be used without the panel unit Graphical user interface, available in the browser on WiFi-enabled devices Designed for mouse and touch input, unique zoom-and-pan navigation Drag and drop handling of presets Preset System Unlimited number of banks and presets per bank User-editable comment and color tag per preset Functions for searching and comparing presets Morphing transition between presets Undo System Unlimited undo for all user interactions, including sound editing steps Undo list with support for multiple editing branches (tree view) Change indication and comparison with the original parameter value Continuous Digital Audio Capture Permanent lossless recording of the digital output signal Hours of FLAC-compressed audio (at least 80 min) stored in a ring buffer Browser-based graphical UI for review, play-back and download The states of the synth engine along the time line can be restored Download of selected segments to the computer as WAV or FLAC files Connections Stereo line outputs, balanced by transformers (TRS and XLR connectors) Headphones output at the front with separate volume control Four inputs for pedals, switches or CV (TRS, flexible pin-assignment) USB host connector for data storage, software updates, and MIDI Directly connectable to USB MIDI devices Optional MIDI Bridge accessory for connection to a computer High resolution (14-bit) option for MIDI velocities and control values Dimensions, Weight Base unit only: 900 x 290 x 100 mm (width x depth x height), 10.
5 kg Including panel unit: 900 x 410 x 160 mm (width x depth x height), 13.
5 kg User Manual - 11.
Parameter Reference C15 Documentation / User Manual / Parameter Reference Parameter Reference This chapter is currently in development and will be added in the future.
Consider using Parameter Infos for now, as described in chapter Contextual Info.
User Manual - 12.
License Documents C15 Documentation / User Manual / License Documents License Documents GNU General Public License Apache License FreeType Project License SIL Open Font License User Manual - 13.
Keyboard Shortcuts C15 Documentation / User Manual / Keyboard Shortcuts Shortcuts for the Graphical User Interface UI Components show/hide Presets show/hide Parameters Tabs show/hide Preset tab show/hide Parameter tab show/hide Sound tab Windows show/hide Parameter Info window show/hide Preset Info window show/hide Bank Info window show/hide Undo History window Context Menus , Mousebutton, open the local context menu close the local context menu Banks/Presets Arrow select next Bank Arrow select previous Bank Arrow select next Preset Arrow select previous Preset on bank in Preset Tab select previous/next preset (depends on direction) load/reload selected Preset delete the selected Preset(s) enable/disable Direct Load (and open the Preset Tab) on preset start Multiple Selection on background finish Multiple Selection (and restore the previous selection) select multiple Presets Preset Store activate Store Select mode (and open the Preset Tab) apply Store (and finish the Store Select mode) store Preset at current position (depending on Append/Insert/Overwrite) Rename open the Rename dialog Apply (and close the dialog) Cancel (and close the dialog) Parameter Editing increment value, coarse increment value, fine decrement value, coarse decrement value, fine on parameter set to Default value on parameter adjust parameter control position, coarse (depends on direction) on parameter adjust parameter control position, fine (depends on direction) on Parameter in Paramater Tab adjust selected parameter control position Search open Preset Search dialog finish Search (and close the dialog) Undo/Redo Undo Redo separate browser Tabs open the C15 Documentation (in a new browser tab) open the MC View (in a new browser tab) open the Recorder (in a new browser tab) Panning temporarily lock the interface (parameters/banks) in order to allow panning gestures on them Zooming on Blackground 1st time: zoom to standard position and scale 2nd time: back to last zoom position and scale on group header 1st time: zoom group to fullscreen 2nd time: back to last zoom position and scale on main area adjust zoom level directly Quick Start C15 Documentation / Quick Start Quick Start This document is currently in development and will be added in the future.


=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 - 01.
About these Tutorials C15 Documentation / 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 / About these Tutorials About these tutorials These tutorials were written to make you find your way into the secrets of your C15 synthesizer quickly and easily.
Please consult the Quickstart Guide or the User Manual to learn everything about the basic concept and setup of your C15 before using these tutorials.
Please also consult the User Manual any time to delve deeper into the capabilities of the C15 synthesis engine, and to learn about all the details of any of the parameters of the instrument.
A tutorial will teach you basic aspects of the C15s concepts as well as the various components of the sound engine, and how they interact with each other, in a hands-on manner.
It is an easy way to familiarize yourself with your C15, and a starting point for your sound design work on the instrument it is, too.
If you feel like learning more about the details of a specific parameter (e.
g.
value ranges, scaling, modulation capabilities etc), please refer to chapter 8.
4.
Parameter Reference of the User Manual at any time.
You can use the tutorials and the User Manual in parallel.
The tutorials use the front panel of the instrument.
In case you would rather like to work with the Graphic User Interface, please refer to the Quickstart Guide or chapter 7 User Interfaces of the User Manual first to learn about the basic concepts of the GUI.
After this, you will be able to easily apply the programming steps described and transfer them from the hardware panel to the GUI.
Formats These tutorials describe fairly simple programming examples you can follow step by step.
You will find lists boasting programming steps and figures that show the C15s user interface state.
To make things perfectly clear, we make use of specific formatting throughout the entire tutorial.
Buttons (Section) that need to be pressed are formatted in yellow.
The name of the section follows in (brackets).
The Encoder is labelled the same way: Sustain (Envelope A)  Encoder  Secondary parameters that can be accessed by repeatedly hitting a button are labelled in yellow italic: Asym Data values are yellow and in square brackets: [60.
0 %] Controllers, as the Ribbons and Pedals, are labelled in yellow Capitals: PEDAL 1 Programming steps to be performed are indented to the right and marked with a triangle, like this: &#xE01A; Notes on the previous programming step are even more indented to the right and marked with a double slash: // This will look e.
g.
like this: Applying modulation to the PM self modulation of Oscillator A: Press PM A (Oscillator B) two times.
Env A is highlighted in the display.
Turn the Encoder to [30.
0 %].
Oscillator B is now being phase-modulated by the signal of Oscillator A.
The modulation depth is controlled by Envelope A at a value of 30.
0%.
Every once in a while, you will find some notes of particular importance (at least we believe so...).
They are marked by an exclamation mark (which looks like this: &#xE172;&ensp;Please note that there is  Sometimes, you will find some explanations within a list of programming steps.
They provide a little more in-depth knowledge and are called Excursions.
They look like this: Excursion: Parameter Value Resolution Some parameters need a ...
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat.
Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur.
Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.
Here and there, you will find short recaps  they look like this: Recap: Oscillator section Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat.
Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur.
Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.
Basic Conventions Before starting, it is crucial to understand some basic conventions of the front panel  more on this in the Quickstart Guide: When a button on a Selection Panel is pressed, the parameter is selected and its value can be edited.
Its LED will light up permanently.
Additional Sub Parameters can be accessed by pressing the button multiple times.
There can be some flashing LEDs to show the targets of the signal that is generated in the selected Parameter Group.
When a Macro Control is selected, flashing LEDs dislay the parameters it is modulating.
When the Preset screen is on, the currently active signal flow or active parameters respectively are indicated by LEDs lighting up permanently.
Hardware User Interface The images on the next page show the Edit Panel and one of the Selection Panels of the Panel Unit, and the Control Panel of the Base Unit.
Button Display Button Button 1 to 4 Button Button Button Button Button Button Button Buttons Buttons Group Indicator Selection Button for Sub Parameters Buttons Display Buttons 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 - 02.
Init Sound C15 Documentation / 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 / Init Sound Init Sound The first tutorial describes the basic functions of the sound generation modules, their interaction (resp.
modulation capabilities), and the signal path.
You will learn how to create specific waveforms using the oscillators, blend them, and feed them into subsequent modules like filters and effects.
We will be dealing with the filters as sound-processing devices as well as with the sound-generating capabilities of the Comb Filter.
The tutorial will be topped off by an insight into the feedback capabilities (which is another very interesting way of creating sounds).
As you certainly know already, the C15s oscillators initially generate sine-waves.
The real fun starts when these sine-waves are warped to generate complex waveforms with amazing sonic results.
We will start right there: Init Sound Starting with the Init Sound is the best thing to do.
When loading the Init Sound, parameters are set to their default values (same thing happens when using the default button).
The Init Sound uses the most basic signal path with no modulations at all.
Most of the mix parameters are set to zero value.
Initializing all parameters (resp.
the edit buffer): Press Sound (Edit Panel).
Press Init (Edit Panel / Soft Button 1).
Press Enter (Edit Panel).
Now the edit buffer has been initialized.
You will hear  nothing.
Dont worry, you are not the one to blame.
Please proceed: Press A (Output Mixer).
Turn the Encoder to approx.
[60.
0 %].
Play some notes.
You will hear the typical Init sound  a simple, slowly decaying one-oscillator sine-wave sound.
Excursion: A Short Glimpse at the Signal Path Starting point are the two oscillators.
They produce sine-waves for a start but these sine-waves can be warped in various ways to produce complex waveshapes.
This is done by phase modulation (PM) and by using the Shaper sections.
Each oscillator can be phase-modulated by three sources: itself, the other oscillator, and the feedback signal.
All three sources can be used at the same time in variable proportions.
Three Envelopes control both Oscillators and Shapers (Env A  Osc/Shaper A, Env B  Osc/Shaper B, while Env C can be routed pretty flexibly, e.
g.
for controlling the filters).
To process the oscillator signals even further, there is a State Variable Filter as well as a Comb Filter.
When operating at high resonance settings and being pinged by an oscillator signal, both filters can work as signal generators in their own right.
Oscillator/Shaper outputs and filter outputs are fed into the Output Mixer.
This section allows you to blend and balance various sonic components with each other.
To avoid undesired distortion at the output stage, keep an eye on the Output Mixers Level parameter.
Values around  4.
5 or  5 dB are mostly on the safe side.
If you want to use distortion deliberately to produce timbral variations, please consider using the Drive parameter of the Output Mixer or the Cabinet effect instead.
The final stage of the signal path is the effects Section.
It is fed from the Output Mixer where all voices are combined into a monophonic signal.
When using the Init sound, all five effects will be bypassed.


=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 - 03.
Oscillator Section / Creating Waveforms C15 Documentation / 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 / Oscillator Section / Creating Waveforms Oscillator Section / Creating Waveforms A typical parameter screen of the Panel Unit display looks like this: Name Indicator Value Labels Parameters Oscillator Basics Lets (de)tune Oscillator A: Press Pitch (Oscillator A) AB (Comb Filter) AB (State Variable Filter) and A (Output Mixer) are flashing to show you that both filters and the Output Mixer are receiving a signal from the selected Oscillator A (even though you are not hearing much filtering right now).
Turn the Encoder and detune Oscillator A by semitones.
The pitch is displayed in MIDI-note numbers: 60 is MIDI note 60 and equal to note C3.
It is the pitch that you hear when playing the third C of the keyboard.
Now lets play around with Key Tracking: Press Pitch (Oscillator A) two times.
Its light stays on.
Now watch the display.
It shows the highlighted parameter Key Trk.
Note that multiple hitting of a parameter button toggles between the upper main parameter (here Pitch) and several sub parameters (here Env C and Key Trk) that are related to the main parameter.
Turn the Encoder to [50.
00 %].
Oscillator As keyboard tracking is now halved which equals playing quarter-tones on the keyboard.
Turn the Encoder to [0.
00 %].
Each key is playing at the same pitch now.
A key tracking close to 0.
00% can be very useful when an oscillator is used as LFO-like modulation source or slow PM-carrier.
More on this later Turn the Encoder back to [100.
00 %] (the usual semi-tone scaling).
Reset every parameter to its default value by hitting Default (Edit Panel).
Lets introduce some envelope parameters: (please consult the User Manual for all details of the envelope parameters or use the Info button on the Edit Panel).
Press Attack (Envelope A).
Turn the Encoder and play some notes.
Press Release (Envelope A).
Turn the Encoder and play some notes.
Envelope A is always connected to Oscillator A and controls its volume.
Press Sustain (Envelope A).
Turn the Encoder to approx.
[60,0 %].
Oscillator A is now providing a static signal level.
Oscillator Self-Modulation Press PM Self (Oscillator A).
Turn the Encoder back and forth.
Oscillator As output is fed back into its input.
At higher rates, the output wave gets increasingly warped and generates a sawtooth wave with rich harmonic content.
Sweeping the Encoder will produce a filter-like effect.
Excursion: bipolar parameter values PM Self works at positive as well as negative parameter values.
You will find many more parameters with positive and negative values, not only modulation depth settings (as you might know from other synthesizers) but also mixing levels etc.
In many cases, a negative value represents a phase-shifted signal.
Only when mixing such a signal with other signals, phase cancellations will generate audible effects.
With Self PM active, a positive value will generate a sawtooth-wave with rising edge, negative values generate a falling edge.
Lets make Oscillator self-modulation dynamic and control Self-PM of Oscillator A by Envelope A: Set the Encoder to approx.
[70,0 %] self modulation amount.
Press PM Self (Oscillator A) again.
Watch the Display: Env A is highlighted You have just accessed the first sub-parameter behind PM-Self (Env A).
It is the amount of Envelope A modulating PM-Self of Oscillator A.
Alternatively, you can toggle through the sub-parameters behind the currently active button with the rightmost soft button at any time.
Turn the Encoder to [100,0 %].
Envelope A now provides a dynamic modulation depth for PM Self of Osc A.
As a result, you will hear a transition from bright to soft or the other way round, depending on the settings of Env A.
Now tweak the different Envelope A parameters a bit (see above): Depending on the settings, you will hear some simple brassy or percussive sounds.
Since Envelope A is influenced by keyboard velocity, the sound will also depend on how hard you are hitting the keys.
Introducing the Shaper First, please reset Oscillator A to a simple sine-wave by selecting PM Self and PM Self - Env A (Env A) and hitting Default.
Envelope A should be providing a simple organ-like setting.
Press Mix (Shaper A).
Turn the Encoder slowly to [100.
0 %] and play some notes.
At increasing Mix values, you will hear the sound getting brighter.
Note that the sound is somewhat different from the results of PM Self.
Now the Oscillator A signal is being routed through Shaper A.
Mix blends between the pure oscillator signal (0 %) and the output of the Shaper (100 %).
Press Drive (Shaper A).
Turn the Encoder slowly and play some notes.
Then set the Drive to [20.
0 dB].
Press Fold (Shaper A).
Turn the Encoder slowly and play some notes.
Press Asym (Shaper A).
Turn the Encoder slowly and play some notes.
Fold, Drive and Asym(metry) warp the signal to generate various waveshapes with very different harmonic content and timbral results.
Press PM Self (Oscillator A) again.
Turn the Encoder to [50.
0 %] and play some notes.
Press PM Self (Oscillator A) again.
Turn the Encoder slowly and play some notes.
Now you have just fed the Shaper with the self-modulated (resp.
sawtooth wave) signal instead of a sine wave.
Excursion: whats that Shaper doing? In simple words, the Shaper distorts the oscillator signal in various ways.
It maps the input signal to a shaping curve to produce a more complex waveform.
Depending on the settings, a vast range of different harmonic spectra can be created.
The Drive parameter controls the intensity of distortion induced by the Shaper and can produce a vaguely filter-like effect.
The Fold parameter controls the amount of ripples in the waveform.
It emphases some odd harmonics while the fundamental is attenuated.
The sound gets some characteristic nasal quality, not unlike a resonating filter.
Asymmetry treats the upper and the lower part of the input signal differently and generates even harmonics (2nd, 4th, 6th etc) that way.
At high values, the signal is pitched one octave higher while the fundamental is eliminated.
All three parameters interact with each other, producing countless variations of distortion curves and resulting waveforms.
Excursion: the C15s signal routing / blending As with all signal routings in the C15, the Shaper is not switched in or out of the signal path but continuously blended with another (usually the dry) signal.
This makes sense since it provides great morphing capabilities without any steps or clicks in the sound.
More on this later.
Excursion: parameter value fine resolution Some parameters need a very fine resolution to fine-tune a sound the way you desire.
In order to do this, the resolution of every parameter can be multiplied by a factor of 10 (sometimes even 100).
Simply hit the Fine button to toggle fine resolution on and off.
To get an impression of that effect, try out Drive (Shaper A) in fine resolution mode.
By selecting a new parameter, the fine mode will automatically be disabled.
To enable fine resolution permanently, press Shift + Fine.
Now set PM Self to [75 %].
Press PM Self (Oscillator A) another two times (or use the rightmost soft button) to access the sub-parameter Shaper.
It is highlighted in the display.
Turn the Encoder slowly and play some notes.
Now the signal for the phase-modulation of Oscillator A is fed back post Shaper: Instead of a sine-wave, a complex waveform is now used as modulator.
This generates even more overtones and, beyond a certain degree, it can produce increasingly chaotic results, noisy or chirpy sounds in particular.
You will hear the effect of the shaper even when you set the shapers Mix parameter to zero.
Both Oscillators together Mixing both Oscillators: First, please reload the Init Sound.
Both Oscillators are now generating simple sine-waves again.
Press A (Output Mixer).
Turn the Encoder to approx.
[60.
0 %].
Press B (Output Mixer).
Turn the Encoder to approx.
[60.
0 %].
Now, both oscillators are sending their signals through the Output Mixer.
Press Level (Output Mixer).
Turn the Encoder to approx.
[-10.
0 dB].
You have just reduced the mixers output signal enough to avoid unwanted distortion.
Press Sustain (Envelope A).
Turn the Encoder to [50 %].
Oscillator A is now providing a sine-wave at a constant level whereas Oscillator B is still fading out over time.
Creating intervals: Press Pitch (Oscillator B).
Turn the Encoder to [67.
00 st].
Play some notes.
Now Oscillator B is tuned seven semitones (a fifth) above Oscillator A.
You may also try out different intervals like e.
g.
an octave (72) or an octave plus an additional fifth (79).
Turn the Encoder back to [60.
00 st] or use the Default button.
Press PM Self (Oscillator B).
Turn the Encoder to approx.
[60.
0 %].
Play some notes.
Oscillator B is modulating itself now, sounding brighter than Oscillator A.
Press Decay 2 (Envelope B).
Turn the Encoder to approx.
[300 ms].
Oscillator B is now fading out at a medium decay rate.
The resulting sound is vaguely reminiscent of a piano of sorts.
Press Sustain (Envelope B).
Turn the Encoder to [50%].
Now, both Oscillators are producing steady tones.
The resulting sound is vaguely reminiscent of an organ.
You have just created some sounds that are made up of two components: A basic sine-wave from Oscillator A and some sustained / decaying overtones from Oscillator B.
Very simple still, but with lots of creative options to choose from  Detuning Oscillator B: Press PM Self (Oscillator A).
Turn the Encoder to [60.
00 %].
We simply wanted to make the entire sound somewhat brighter, to improve the audibility of the following example.
Press Pitch (Oscillator B).
Press Fine (Edit Panel).
Sweep the Encoder slowly up and down and dial in [60.
07 st].
Oscillator B has now been detuned by 7 Cents above Oscillator A.
Detuning generates a beat frequency that we all love so much because it makes the sound so fat and vibrant.
Tweaking the sound a bit more: Press Attack (Envelope A and B).
Turn the Encoder.
Press Release (Envelope A and B).
Turn the Encoder.
Adjust PM Self level and Envelope parameters as you please.
Depending on the settings, the results will vary between string and brass-like sounds.
The same beat frequency at all pitch ranges with Key Tracking As you may have noticed, the beat frequency changes across the range of the keyboard.
Higher up the keyboard, the effect can grow too strong and sound a bit unnatural.
To achieve a steady beat frequency at all pitch ranges: Press Pitch (Oscillator B) three times.
Key Trk is highlighted in the display.
Press Fine (Edit Panel).
Turn the Encoder slowly to [99.
80 %].
At a Key Tracking below 100%, the pitch of higher notes will be increasingly reduced resp.
not proportional to their position on the keyboard.
This detunes high notes a bit less than low notes and keeps the beat frequency lower in high ranges, resp.
steady across a wide pitch range.
One oscillator modulating the other: First, please reload the Init-Sound.
Dont forget to turn up Level A on the Output Mixer to [60.
0 %].
Both Oscillators are now generating simple sine-waves.
What you are hearing right now is Oscillator A.
Press PM B (Oscillator A).
Turn the Encoder and dial in approx.
[75.
00 %].
Oscillator B is not added to the output mixer but used to modulate the phase of Oscillator A instead.
Since Oscillator B is currently generating a sine-wave at the same pitch as Oscillator A, the audible effect is similar to self-modulation of Oscillator A.
But here comes the fun part, we are now detuning Oscillator B: Press Pitch (Oscillator B).
Sweep the Encoder and play some notes.
Then dial in [53.
00 st].
You will now be hearing some soft metallic timbres that sound quite promising (but thats only us, of course...).
Excursion  The Secrets of Phase Modulation (PM)  Oscillator Pitches and Modulation Index When modulating the phase of one oscillator by another one at a different frequency, lots of sidebands or new overtones respectively are generated.
Those were not present in the source signals.
The frequency ratio of both oscillator signals defines the harmonic content resp.
the overtone structure of the resulting signal.
The resulting sound remains harmonic as long as the ratio between the modulated oscillator (called carrier  here Oscillator A) and the modulating oscillator (called modulator  here Oscillator B) is a proper multiple (1:1, 1:2, 1:3 etc).
If not, the resulting sound will become increasingly inharmonic and dissonant.
Depending on the frequency ratio, the sonic character is reminiscent of wood, metal or glass.
This is because the frequencies in a vibrating piece of wood, metal or glass are very similar to the frequencies generated by PM.
Obviously, PM is a very good tool to generate sounds that feature this type of timbral character.
A second crucial parameter is the intensity of the phase modulation or modulation index.
In the C15, the appropriate parameters are called PM A and PM B.
Different values will produce radically different timbral results.
The interaction between the pitch of the respective oscillators and their modulation depth settings (PM A / B) is also crucial to the sonic results.
Controlling the Modulator by an Envelope: As you have learned in the meantime, frequency and mod depth of the modulator (here Oscillator B) are crucial for shaping sound using PM.
Unlike classic subtractive synthesis, it is very easy to generate a wide range of noisy and metallic timbres that offer lots of potential when emulating acoustic instruments, like e.
g.
mallets or plucked strings.
To explore this, we will now add some sort of percussive stroke to a simple sound: Load the Init sound and turn up Oscillator A (the carrier): A (Output Mixer) = [75.
0 %] Press Pitch (Oscillator B).
Set the Encoder to [96.
00 st].
Press PM B (Oscillator A).
Set the Encoder to approx [60.
00 %].
Now you are hearing Oscillator A being phase-modulated by Oscillator B.
The sound is bright and slowly decaying.
Press Pitch (Oscillator B) until Key Trk is highlighted in the display.
Turn the Encoder and dial in [0.
00 %].
The Key Tracking of Oscillator B is off now, providing a steady modulator-pitch for all keys.
In some key ranges, the sound is now becoming somewhat odd.
Press PM B (Oscillator A) until Env B is highlighted in the display.
Set the Encoder to [100.
0 %].
Now Envelope B is controlling the phase-modulation depth (PM B) over time.
Press Decay 1 (Envelope B).
Turn the Encoder to [10.
0 ms].
Press Decay 2 (Envelope B).
Turn the Encoder to approx.
[40.
0 ms] and play some notes.
Keep Breakpoint (BP Level) at default value 50%.
Envelope B is now producing a short percussive stroke that quickly fades out.
In every key range, the percussive stroke sounds slightly different since the pitch ratio between carrier and modulator is a bit different for every key.
This helps to make emulations of natural sounds pretty realistic.
Using Key Tracking as a sound parameter: Press Pitch (Oscillator B) until Key Trk is highlighted in the display.
Turn the Encoder and dial in [50.
00 %] while playing some notes.
The Key Tracking of Oscillator B has been enabled again which forces Oscillator B to change its pitch depending on the note played.
As you remember, pitch ratios between oscillators are altered and hence the harmonic structure of the resulting sound will also be altered across the entire note range.
Enjoy trying out some timbral results.
Using the Modulator Pitch to change the sonic character: Now change Pitch (Oscillator B).
You will notice the timbral transition from wooden (medium pitch ranges) through metallic to glassy (high pitch ranges).
Re-adjust Decay 2 (Envelope B) a bit also and you will hear some simple but amazing tuned percussion sounds.
As a pretty nice-sounding example, dial in e.
g.
Pitch (Oscillator B) 105.
00 st and Decay 2 (Envelope B) 500 ms.
Have fun and get carried away (but not too much)  Cross modulation: Press PM A (Oscillator B).
Turn the Encoder slowly up and dial in approx.
[50.
00 %].
The phase of Oscillator B is now being modulated by Oscillator A.
That means, both oscillators are now modulating each others phase.
This is called cross- or x-modulation.
That way, lots of inharmonic overtones are produced and, accordingly, the sonic results can be quite odd and often noisy.
They depend very much on the frequency/pitch ratios of either oscillators (please see above).
Please feel free to explore some nice Pitch B values and Envelope B settings as well as variations of PM A and PM B and the modulation of PM A by Envelope A.
At proper parameter value ratios, you may create some nice plucked strings  nylon and steel strings included.
Excursion  Adjusting velocity sensitivity You certainly want to explore a lot of expressive potential when enjoying your sounds.
The C15 provides a lot of capabilities to do so (Ribbon Controllers, Pedals etc).
For starters, we would like to introduce Keyboard Velocity.
Its default setting is 30.
0 dB which works pretty well in many cases.
Press Level Vel (Envelope A).
Turn the Encoder and dial in [0.
0 dB] first, then increase the value slowly to [60.
0 dB] while playing some notes.
Repeat the process with Envelope B.
Since Envelope A controls the level of Oscillator A, a change of its velocity value affects the loudness of the current sound.
Oscillator B level (the Modulator) is controlled by Envelope B.
Since Oscillator B determines the timbral character of the current setting to some extent, its level has a huge effect on the current sound.
Oscillator as LFO (Low Frequency Oscillator): Now set up your C15 so that: Oscillator A produces a steady sine-wave (no Self-PM, no Envelope modulation) Oscillator A is constantly phase-modulated by Oscillator B (again no Self-PM, no Envelope modulation here).
PM B (Oscillator A) should have a value around [90.
0 %] to make all the following sonic results easily audible.
Oscillator B should not be part of the audible output signal, i.
e.
B (Output Mixer) is [0.
0 %].
Press Pitch (Oscillator B).
Sweep the Encoder up and down while playing some notes.
Then dial in [0.
00 st].
You will hear a fast pitch vibrato.
Its frequency is depending on the note played.
Press Pitch (Oscillator B) until Key Trk is highlighted in the display.
Turn the Encoder and dial in [0.
00 %].
The Key Tracking of Oscillator B is set to Off now which results in a constant pitch (and vibrato speed) across the entire note range.
Now Oscillator B is behaving like an (almost) ordinary LFO and can be used as a source for periodic modulation in the sub-audio range.
Please note that, in contrast to most other (analog) synthesizers with a dedicated LFO, the C15 sports an oscillator/LFO per voice.
They are not phase-synced which helps to animate many sounds in a natural way.
Recap: Oscillator section The C15s combination of two oscillators and two shapers, controlled by two envelopes, allows the generation of many different kinds of waveshapes from simple to complex: Initially, both Oscillators produce sine-waves (without any overtones) With Self PM active, each Oscillator generates a variable sawtooth wave (with all overtones) When routed through the Shaper, depending on the settings of Drive and Fold, various rectangle and pulse-like waveforms can be generated (with odd- numbered overtones).
The Shapers Asym(metry) parameter adds even harmonics.
&#xE172;&ensp;Interaction of the parameters mentioned above produces a wide timbral scope and dramatic timbral shifts.
Mixing both Oscillator/Shaper outputs in the Output Mixer produces sounds with two sonic components, as well as intervals and out-of-tune effects.
Phase Modulation (PM A / PM B) of one Oscillator by the other as well as cross-modulation can produce inharmonic sounds.
The pitch ratios of the Oscillators and the modulation settings mainly determine the timbral results.
&#xE172;&ensp;Careful adjustment of pitch, Key Tracking and mod depth settings is important for timbre as well as for making pitched sounds playable! Use Fine resolution to adjust the crucial parameters.
Introduction of Envelope A and B produces dynamic control over level and timbre.
Oscillators can be used as LFOs when key tracking is disabled.


=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 - 04.
The State Variable Filter C15 Documentation / 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 / The State Variable Filter The State Variable Filter To introduce the State Variable Filter (S.
V.
Filter), we should first set up the oscillator section to produce a sawtooth waveform which is rich in overtones.
This is a good input signal fodder to explore the State Variable Filter.
First, please load the Init sound  this time, you do not need to crank up A on the Output Mixer! Set Oscillator As PM Self to 90 % for a nice sounding saw-wave.
Set Envelope As Sustain to 60 % in order to produce a steady tone.
Now please proceed like this: Enabling the S.
V.
Filter: Press S.
V.
Filter (Output Mixer).
Set the Encoder to approx.
[50.
0 %].
The S.
V.
Filter input of the Output Mixer is fully open now and you can hear the signal passing the filter.
Since input A is closed, all you are hearing is the plain S.
V.
Filter signal.
Press A  B (State Variable Filter).
This parameter determines the ratio between the Oscillator/Shaper signals A and B, fed into the S.
V.
Filter input.
For now, keep it at its default setting A, i.
e.
[0.
0 %].
The very basic Parameters: Press Cutoff (State Variable Filter).
S.
V.
Filter (Output Mixer) is flashing to let you know that the S.
V.
Filter is part of the signal path.
Sweep the Encoder across the entire value range and dial in the default value [80.
0 st].
You will hear the characteristic transition from bright to dull since overtones are gradually being eliminated from the signal.&#xE172;&ensp;At very low settings, when the cutoff setting is below the frequency of the fundamental note, the output signal might become inaudible.
Press Reson (State Variable Filter).
Sweep the Encoder across the entire value range and dial in the default value [50.
0 st].
When increasing resonance values, you will hear frequencies around the cutoff setting becoming increasingly edgier and more pronounced.
Cutoff and resonance are the most effective filter parameters.
Excursion  Controlling the current Parameter using Ribbon 1 Sometimes, it can be more useful (or funnier) to control a parameter using a ribbon controller rather than an encoder.
This is useful when performing with the parameter as well as adjusting values very accurately.
To assign a Ribbon to a specific parameter (here the Cutoff of the S.
V.
Filter), simply: Press Cutoff (State Variable Filter).
Press Mode (Base Unit Control Panel) until the Base Unit Display shows Cutoff.
This mode is also called Edit Mode.
Slide your finger across RIBBON 1.
The parameter currently selected (Cutoff) is now controlled by RIBBON 1, or your finger tip &#xE172;&ensp;When using the C15s Macro Controls, the Ribbons / Pedals can control various parameters at the same time.
This very interesting topic will be covered in a later tutorial.
Stay tuned.
Exploring some of the more advanced S.
V.
Filter parameters: &#xE172;&ensp;Our word of advice: No matter whether you are familiar with filters in general or not, please grab the user manual and take some time to study all those flashy S.
V.
Filter parameters in detail.
Excursion: The S.
V.
Filter functionality The S.
V.
Filter is a combination of two resonating two-pole state-variable filters, each with a slope of 12 dB.
Cutoff and Resonance can be controlled manually or modulated by Envelope C and Key Tracking.
The spacing between both cutoff-points is variable (Spread).
The filter characteristics can be swept continuously from low through band to high-pass mode (LBH).
Both filters work in series by default but can be continuously shifted to parallel operation (Parallel).
Setting Spread to 0.
0 st creates a simple four-pole filter.
At higher Spread values, the spacing between the two Cutoff frequencies increases.
Cutoff and Resonance always affect both filter sections in the same manner.
LBH determines the characteristics of both filter sections: L  both filter sections work in lowpass mode.
High frequencies are attenuated, producing a sound that can be described as round, soft, fat, dull etc.
H  both filter sections work in highpass mode.
Low frequencies are attenuated, producing a sound that can be described as sharp, thin, bright etc.
B  the first filter section works as a highpass, the second as a lowpass.
Low and high frequencies are both attenuated and a frequency band with variable width (Spread) passes the S.
V.
Filter.
Particularly at higher Resonance settings, vowel/vocal-like sounds can be achieved.
FM provides a Cutoff modulation by the Oscillator/Shaper signals A and B.
Very good for aggressive and distorted sounds.
Check out the parameters mentioned above and keep in mind that they all interact with each other in some way.
Use the Default button to reset a parameter value.
Envelope / Key Tracking modulation of Cutoff and Resonance: Press Cutoff (State Variable Filter) until Env C is highlighted in the display.
Set the Encoder to [70.
00 st].
You will hear the sound becoming increasingly dull over time since the Cutoff is modulated by Envelope C.
Vary the settings of Envelope C parameters and the modulation depth (Env C).
For more dramatic filter sweeps set the Resonance of the S.
V.
Filter to higher values.
Press Cutoff (State Variable Filter) until Key Trk is highlighted in the display.
Sweep the Encoder across the entire range and dial in [50.
0 %].
When set to 0.
0 %, Cutoff has the same value across the entire keyboard range.
When reducing the Key Tracking value, the Cutoff value will increase in higher keyboard ranges and the sound grows brighter  an effect you can find with many acoustic instruments.
Please check Env C / Key Trk modulation of the Resonance as well.
Changing the Filter Characteristics: The S.
V.
Filter is a four-pole filter composed of two two-pole filters.
The Spread parameter determines the interval between the two cutoff frequencies of these two parts.
Set the Resonance to [80 %].
Press Spread (State Variable Filter).
By default, Spread is set to 12 semitones.
Try settings between 0 and 60 semitones and also vary the Cutoff.
When reducing the Spread value, the two peaks will emphasize each other and the result will be a very intensely resonating, peaking sound.
Press Spread (State Variable Filter) again until LBH is highlighted in the display.
Sweep the Encoder across the entire value range and dial in the default value [0.
0 %] (Lowpass).
Using the LBH parameter, you can morph continuously from lowpass through bandpass to highpass.
0.
0 % is fully lowpass, 100.
0 % fully highpass.
The width of the bandpass is determined by the Spread parameter.
Cutoff FM: Press FM (State Variable Filter).
Sweep the Encoder across the entire range.
Now the filter input signal is modulating the Cutoff frequency.
Usually, the sound gets increasingly nasty and abrasive.
Please note that positive and negative FM can produce quite different results.
Press FM (State Variable Filter) until A  B is highlighted in the display.
A  B blends between the Oscillator/Shaper signals A and B and determines the signal ratio which is modulating the Filter Cutoff.
Depending on the waveshape and pitch of both Oscillator/Shaper signals, the results can differ considerably from each other.
Reset FM and A  B to their default values.


=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 - 05.
The Output Mixer C15 Documentation / 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 / The Output Mixer The Output Mixer You have already laid your hands on the Output Mixer.
Here you will find some more info on that module.
If you are only popping in at this point, we should first set the oscillator section to produce a sawtooth waveform: First, please load the Init sound  do not forget to crank up A on the Output Mixer! Set Oscillator As PM Self to [90 %| for a nice-sounding sawtooth-wave.
Set Envelope As Sustain to [60 %| in order to produce a steady tone.
Now carry on, please: Using the Output Mixer: Press S.
V.
Filter (Output Mixer).
Set the Encoder to approx.
[50.
0 %].
Press A (Output Mixer).
Set the Encoder to approx.
[50.
0 %].
You have just combined the output signal of the S.
V.
Filter with the direct (unfiltered) signal of Oscillator A.
Sweep the Encoder across the entire value range and back to [50.
0 %].
Positive Level values add signals.
Negative Level values subtract the signal from the others.&#xE172;&ensp;Because of phase cancellation, positive and negative values may produce different timbral results here and there.
It is worth trying out both polarities of the Levels.&#xE172;&ensp;Please note that high input levels can produce audible saturation effects that make the sound edgier and/or more aggressive.
To avoid unwanted distortion in the subsequent stages (e.
g.
effect section), please compensate for the gain boost by reducing the output level of the mixer by using Level (Output Mixer).
The Drive Parameter: Press Drive (Output Mixer).
Sweep the Encoder across the entire value range.
Now the output signal of the mixer is passing through a flexible distortion circuit that produces everything from mild fuzzy distortion up to wildest sound mangling.
Check out the Drive parameters Fold and Asymmetry as well.
To avoid unwanted distortion in the subsequent stages (e.
g.
effect section), please compensate for the gain boost by reducing the output level of the mixer by using Level (Output Mixer).
Reset all Drive parameters to their default values.


=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 - 06.
The Comb Filter C15 Documentation / 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 / The Comb Filter The Comb Filter The Comb Filter can shape an incoming sound by imposing specific characteristics on it.
The Comb Filter can also work as a resonator and it can produce periodic waveforms like an oscillator this way.
It is an integral part of the C15s sound generation, and it can be useful when achieving imbral characteristics of e.
g.
plucked or bowed strings, blown reeds, horns, and many strange things in between and far beyond that.
Excursion  Comb Filter Basics Lets have a brief look at the C15s Comb Filter structure: Basically, a comb filter is a delay with a feedback path.
Incoming signals pass the delay section and a certain amount of the signal is then being fed back into the input.
The signals making their rounds in this feedback loop generate a tone that can be controlled by various parameters to achieve specific sonic characteristics and a dedicated pitch  the comb filter is turned into a resonator / sound source.
Enabling the Comb Filter: To explore the Comb Filter, dial in a simple sawtooth-wave sound  we have absolutely no reason to believe you dont already know how to do this.
Okay, here comes a brief reminder for your convenience: Load the Init sound and set the Output Mixer level A to [50.
0 %].
Press Sustain (Envelope A).
Set the Encoder to approx.
[80.
0 %].
Press PM Self (Oscillator A).
Set the Encoder to [90.
0 %].
Oscillator A is now generating a sustained sawtooth-wave.
Press Comb (Output Mixer).
Set the Encoder to approx.
[50.
0 %].
The Comb Filter signal is now blended with the oscillator signal.
Press A  B (Comb Filter).
This parameter determines the ratio between the Oscillator/Shaper signals A and B, fed into the Comb Filter input.
For the time being, please keep it at its default setting A, i.
e.
0.
0 %.
The very basic Parameters Pitch: Press Pitch (Comb Filter).
Sweep the Encoder slowly across the entire range and dial in [90.
00 st].
Please also try to control it by RIBBON 1in Edit Mode (please refer to page 25).
You will hear the sound change while turning the Encoder.
The Pitch parameter is actually the delay time which is converted and displayed in semitones.
The shifting sound coloration is a result of boosting or eliminating specific frequencies when the delayed signal is combined with the non-delayed signal.
Please also try a negative value for one of the mixing levels.
Decay: Press Decay (Comb Filter).
Sweep the Encoder slowly across the entire range.
Change both Pitch and Decay and try out the various timbral effects.
Decay controls the feedback of the delay.
It determines the amount of the signal making its rounds in the feedback loop, and thus the time it takes for the oscillating feedback loop to fade out.
This depends very much on the delay time dialed in (Pitch).
When changing Pitch slowly, you can hear the peaks and troughs in the frequency spectrum, i.
e.
boosted and attenuated frequencies.&#xE172;&ensp;Please note there are positive and negative Decay values.
Negative values invert the phase of the signal (negative feedback) and provide different sonic results with a certain hollow character  good for e.
g.
bell-like timbres  Exciting the Comb Filter: So far, we have been working with a sustained / static input signal.
Even more interesting is the use of an impulse to stimulate the feedback loop of the Comb Filter: Turn the output signal of Oscillator/Shaper A into a short and sharp click by dialing in suitable parameter values for Envelope A: Attack: 0.
000 ms Decay 1: 2.
0 ms Breakpoint: 100% Decay 2: 4.
0 ms Sustain: 0.
0 % Release: 4.
0 ms Set Decay (Comb Filter) to [1000 ms] Set Pitch (Comb Filter) to [0.
00 st] and slowly turn up the Encoder value while playing some notes.
Then dial in [60.
00 st].
At the lower end of the Pitch range, you will notice audible reflections of the delay line.
Their number depends on the Decay setting (resp.
the feedback level).
At higher pitches, resp.
shorter delay times, the reflections grow increasingly dense until they sound like a static tone that has a dedicated pitch.
Excursion  Some Nuts and Bolts of Physical Modelling What you have just programmed into your C15 is a very simple example of a sound-generation type usually referred to as Physical Modelling.
It comprises a dedicated signal source  the exciter  and a resonator, in our case the Comb Filter.
The exciter signal stimulates the resonator, generating a ringing tone.
Matching sympathetic frequencies of exciter and resonator are boosted, others attenuated.
Depending on the pitch of the exciter (Oscillator pitch) and the resonator (delay time of the Comb Filter), these frequencies can vary a lot.
The audible pitch is determined by the resonator.
This method is characteristic of many acoustic instruments, e.
g.
a plucked string or a blown flute stimulating a resonating body of sorts.
More advanced Parameters / Refining the Sound Key Tracking: Press Decay (Comb Filter) until Key Trk is highlighted in the display.
Sweep the Encoder across the entire range and dial in approx.
[50.
0 %].
Now, the Decay at higher note ranges is reduced, compared to lower note ranges.
This produces a more natural feel, useful for many sounds which are to resemble specific acoustic qualities.
Hi Cut: Press Hi Cut (Comb Filter).
Sweep the Encoder across the entire range and play notes.
Then dial in a value of [110.
00 st].
The signal path of the Comb Filter features a lowpass filter that attenuates high frequencies.
At maximum value (140.
00 st), the lowpass will be opened completely with no frequencies attenuated, yielding a very bright sound.
Decreasing the value gradually, the lowpass is producing an increasingly muffled sound with quickly decaying treble frequencies.
These settings are very useful for emulating e.
g.
plucked strings.
Gate: Press Decay (Comb Filter) until Gate is highlighted in the display.
Sweep the Encoder across the entire range.
Play some notes and dial in [60.
0 %].
This parameter controls to what extent a gate signal reduces the Decay time of the Comb Filter as soon as a key is released.
When disabled (0.
0 %), the Decay will be the same throughout, no matter whether a key is depressed or released.
Particularly in combination with Key Tracking, this also allows for very natural-sounding results, e.
g.
think of the behaviour of a piano keyboard.
AP Tune: Press AP Tune (Comb Filter).
Slowly sweep the Encoder from its maximum to its minimum value while repeating the middle C on the keyboard.
Then dial in [100.
0 st].
This parameter enables an allpass filter in the signal path of the Comb Filter.
Usually (without the allpass filter), the delay time is the same for all passing frequencies.
All the overtones generated (resp.
their multiples) fit perfectly into the delay time range dialled in.
But within resonant bodies of acoustic instruments, things are a bit more complex since the delay times change with frequency.
This effect is emulated by the allpass filter.
The overtones generated by the feedback loop are detuned against each other by the allpass which produces specific inharmonic sonic components.
The lower the allpass filter is tuned, the more overtones are affected, and the timbral variations increase.
This effect is audible e.
g.
in the lowest octave of a piano, which sounds quite metallic.
This is because the physical qualities of those heavy-gauge piano strings, found in the lowest octave, are quite similar to those of metal tines or plates.
Press AP Tune (Comb Filter) until AP Reson is highlighted in the display.
Sweep the Encoder across the entire range while playing some notes.
Then dial in approx.
[50.
0 %].
The resonance parameter of the allpass filter adds a lot of sound-sculpting potential.
Explore the interaction between AP Tune and AP Reson carefully.
They produce approximations of sonic characteristics that are similar to metal tines, plates, and more.
Reset all AP Tune parameters to their default values.
Varying the Exciter Settings (Oscillator A) Even when the Oscillator signal is not audible, its qualities are crucial to the resulting sound.
Envelope shape, pitch, and overtone structure of the exciter have a profound impact on the resonator (Comb Filter).
Envelope shape: Press Sustain (Envelope A).
Set the Encoder to approx.
[30.
0 %] Press Attack (Envelope A).
Set the Encoder to [100 ms] Press Decay 2 (Envelope A).
Set the value to [100 ms] (default).
Oscillator A  the exciter of the Comb Filter  will no longer provide a short ping but a steady tone.
Press Pitch (Oscillator A).
Sweep the Encoder slowly across the entire range and play notes.
Then dial in [48.
00 st].
Enjoy...
Depending on Oscillator 1 Pitch, you will find interesting resonating frequencies as well as frequency cancellations.
The sonic character is sometimes reminiscent of (over)blown reeds or bowed strings.
Using Fluctuation: Press Fluct (Oscillator A).
Sweep the Encoder slowly across the entire range while playing some notes.
Then dial in approx.
[60.
0 %].
At various pitch ratios between Oscillator A (exciter) and Comb Filter (resonator), the frequency boosts and attenuations are very strong and limited to narrow frequency bands.
Consequently, the peaks and notches are quite difficult to handle, and often it is difficult to achieve musically useful results, e.
g.
a steady tonal quality across a wide key range.
The Fluctuation parameter is a welcome aid at this point: It randomly varies the oscillator pitch and thus produces broader frequency bands with matching ratios.
The peaks and notches are evened out, and the sound is becoming more consistent.
The sonic character also changes  in our example, it is shifting from a reed instrument towards a string orchestra.
Recap: Using the Comb Filter as a resonator The Comb Filter is a delay line with feedback loop, driven into oscillation and thus generating a tone.
The Pitch parameter of the Comb Filter determines the delay time and thus the pitch of the generated tone.
Frequency boosts and cancellations in the feedback loop create a complex frequency response that determines the timbral character.
The Decay parameter controls the feedback amount and, by that, the number of repetitions of the input signal.
This determines the decay time of the tone generated by the resonator.
An oscillator signal (exciter) stimulates a response of the comb filter (resonator).
The qualities of the exciter determine the timbral character of the resulting sound to a large extent.
Short, percussive exciter signals produce sounds like plucked strings.
Sustained exciter signals produce sounds like bowed strings or (over)blown woodwinds.
Key Tracking and a Gate (on Decay) as well as a lowpass filter (Hi Cut) produce natural sounding characteristics of plucked strings.
An allpass filter (AP Tune) can shift the overtones and provide sonic characteristics of metal tines or metal plates.
Listen to Oscillator A (the exciter) and the Comb Filter (the resonator) separately by changing the Output Mixer settings.
The oscillator is currently producing a steady noise with a very broad frequency range.
The Comb Filter picks its resonant frequencies and boosts them.
Hence, the frequency ratio between exciter and resonator is crucial to the resulting sound.
Parameters like the exciters volume envelope settings and all Comb Filter parameters also shape the sound and interact with each other.
That way, the C15s physical-modelling features will provide you with a vast field for timbral exploration.


=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 - 07.
Using Feedback Paths C15 Documentation / 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 / Using Feedback Paths Using Feedback Paths As you already know (at least we are confident you do), the C15s signal path provides various ways of feeding back signals which means that certain amounts of signals can be tapped at a specific point in the signal flow and reinserted at an earlier stage.
We will now explore how to create sounds by using these feedback structures.
First, please reload the well known Init sound.
If necessary, please find a detailed description on page 10.
Second, dial in a typical Comb Filter sound with the character of a plucked string.
This will require: the Comb Filter being mixed to the output (Comb (Output Mixer) around 50 %) a short exciter signal, resp.
a very fast decaying oscillator sound (Envelope A: Decay 1 around 1 ms, Decay 2 around 5 ms) with plenty of overtones (high value for PM Self).
It provides the plucked signal part which stimulates the comb filter.
a comb filter setting with medium Decay time (around 1200 ms) and Hi Cut setting (e.
g.
120.
00 st).
Set the Decay Gate to approx.
[40.
0 %].
If necessary, tailor the parameters a bit to your liking until the C15 sounds somewhat like a harpsichord.
Now we are ready to proceed.
Setting up a feedback path: As mentioned earlier, sustained comb filter sounds can be achieved by continuous excitation of the comb filter (resonator).
This can be done by using sustained oscillator signals.
Another way to continuously excite the resonator is feeding a certain amount of its output signal back to its input.
On the C15, this can be done by using the Feedback Mixer, which will be introduced right now: Press Comb (Feedback Mixer).
Turn the Encoder to [40.
0 %].
By doing so, a certain amount of the Comb Filters output signal is routed back to the Feedback bus.
It could also be combined with the output signals of the State Variable Filter and the effects section.
To fully enable the feedback path, the destination of the feedback signal needs to be determined.
Available destinations can be found in the Oscillator and Shaper sections.
We will use the FB Mix insert point located after the Shaper in the signal path.
Please refer to the synth engine overview when you feel lost at this point.
Press FB Mix (Shaper A).
Turn the Encoder to [20.
0 %].
Now you can hear sustained notes.
The Comb Filter signal is tapped and routed back to the Comb Filter input as an exciter signal through the Feedback Mixer and feedback bus.
If the loop gain is greater than 1, it will keep the filter constantly ringing with self-oscillation.
Shaping the feedback sound:  by using negative feedback level settings: Press Comb (Feedback Mixer).
Turn the Encoder to [40.
0 %].
At negative settings, the feedback signal is inverted.
This will typically have a damping effect and shortens the sound produced.
If you are operating the Comb Filter at negative Decay values, the negative values in the Feedback Mixer will drive it into self-oscillation.
Press Decay (Comb Filter).
Turn the Encoder to [1260.
0 ms].
 by applying the signal-shaping parameters of the Feedback Mixer: Press Drive (Feedback Mixer).
Sweep the Encoder across the entire range.
Press Drive (Feedback Mixer) again to access the parameters Fold and Asymmetry.
Again sweep the Encoder across the entire range.
As with the Output Mixer, the Feedback Mixer has a shaper stage that can distort the signal.
The saturation of this stage limits the feedback level to avoid uncontrolled nastiness.
Shaper curves allow a certain sonic control over the self-oscillating signal.
Try out the effects of Drive, Fold, and Asymmetry and listen closely to the sonic results.
Feedback level and polarity as well as the Drive parameters interact with each other.
 by modifying the Envelope / Oscillator A settings (exciter): Still, the entire audible sound is generated by the comb filter only.
Oscillator A is producing nothing but a short exciter signal which influences the resulting waveforms at the output of the Comb Filter  but is not audible itself.
A lot of timbral variations can be achieved by adjusting the parameters of Oscillator A and its Envelope A.
Reset the Parameters of Drive (Feedback Mixer) by using the Default button Press Pitch (Oscillator A).
Sweep the Encoder across its entire range while playing notes and dial in [72.
00 st].
Press Sustain (Envelope A).
Try different Sustain levels while playing notes and dial in approx.
[5 %].
Press Fluct (Oscillator A).
Try different Fluctuation levels while playing notes.
By changing the envelope, pitch, and signal spectrum of Oscillator A, the self-oscillating Comb-Filter will generate a plethora of different timbres.
Please try longer Attack and Decay times as well as different settings of PM, Self, and the Feedback Mixer and FB Mix parameters.
 by filtering the feedback signal using the State Variable Filter: First, lets return to a well-defined (and well-known) setting: Recall the Init sound.
Set Comb (Output Mixer) to [50 %].
Set Decay 1 (Envelope A) to 1 ms and Decay 2 (Envelope A) to [5 ms].
Set PM Self to [75 %].
Set Decay (Comb Filter) to [1260 ms] and Hi Cut to [120.
00 st].
Now we are creating a special feedback routing: Press Comb Mix (State Variable Filter).
Turn the Encoder to [100.
0 %].
Press S.
V.
Filter (Feedback Mixer).
Turn the Encoder to [50.
0 %].
Press FB Mix (Oscillator A).
Turn the Encoder to [25.
0 %].
The State Variable Filter is now placed within the feedback path and is processing the signal arriving from the Comb Filter.
Press Spread (State Variable Filter) until [L - B - H] is enabled.
Turn the Encoder to [50.
0 %] to enable the bandpass setting.
Press Reson (State Variable Filter).
Turn the Encoder to [75.
0 %].
The S.
V.
Filter is now working as a narrow band-pass, selecting a frequency band for the feedback loop.
Press Cutoff (State Variable Filter).
Sweep the Encoder slowly across the entire range and dial in a value that pleases your ear, lets say [80.
0 st].
Shaping the feedback response using the S.
V.
Filter produces stunning timbral results.
By shifting the bandpass, self-oscillation appears only when the band is matching one of the overtones that the Comb Filter can produce.
Sweeping the S.
V.
Filter Cutoff will generate a pattern of overtones.
Please keep in mind that all you are hearing is the output signal of the Comb Filter  the S.
V.
Filter is just part of the feedback path (between Comb Filter and Feedback Mixer) and provides a selective feedback signal.
Oscillator A excites the Comb Filter and is not audible as such either.
 by using the effects output as feedback signal: Another interesting way to shape comb filter / physical modeling sounds of the C15 is using the feedback path of the effects section.
First, disable the S.
V.
Filter in the feedback path of the Comb Filter (of course, the Feedback Mixer provides several feedback paths in parallel but, for the time being, we want to keep things simple): Press S.
V.
Filter (Feedback Mixer).
Turn the Encoder to [0.
0 %].
Feeding back signals from the Effects section to the Comb Filter: Press Effects (Feedback Mixer).
Turn the Encoder slowly up and dial in a value that generates a mild feedback sound.
Values around [50.
0 %] should work fine.
Press the Mix parameter of every effect and dial in a high mix value.
Now you are hearing the feedback signal of the effects chain exciting the comb filter.
While doing so, you will (hopefully) be surprised by some staggering soundscapes.
Each of the effects individually provides a different treatment of the feedback signal and thus contributes a different result to the audible sound.
Cabinet may be used to alter the harmonic content while the Gap Filter (which is a band reject filter that cuts out a certain frequency range) is useful to control the frequency response of the feedback signal.
Flanger, Echo, and Reverb generally add different spatial components and motion to the sound.
Please note that the amount of reverb in the feedback path can be adjusted separately by the Rev Mix parameter of the Feedback Mixer.
Recap: The Feedback Paths Together with the Oscillator / Shaper sections and the Comb Filter, the feedback paths of the C15 provide interesting physical modelling capabilities.
Using feedback paths produces sustained tones without using sustaining oscillator (exciter) settings  great for sounds with woodwind, brass, and bowed-strings-like character.
To set up a feedback path, select and enable a source signal within the Feedback Mixer and a FB Mix point in the Shaper sections.
The polarity of the feedback amounts can be crucial to the sound.
The Drive parameters of the Feedback Mixer can shape the feedback sound.
Altering exciter settings (Oscillator A and its Envelope A) also has an influence on the resulting sound.
The State Variable Filter can be used to select overtones for self-oscillation.
The output signals of the effects can also be fed back via the Feedback Mixer.


=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 C15 Documentation / 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 

=== Sound Generation Tutorial ===

 <!-- -->